0 (0s):
This message comes from constant contact, a digital marketing platform that helps small businesses and nonprofits of all sizes, stay connected with customers, find new ones and do more business. Start your free trial@constantcontact.com.

2 (19s):
I would make a show and you know, you try to get, press people to cover it. They wouldn't, you try to get buyers to buy it. They wouldn't. So I'm like, damn, how am I going to do this next thing?

3 (30s):
Yeah. My experience of it was to go to shows and then be mad that that wasn't enough. And you know, like fashion is like, it's like a more subjective form of like sport let's say, and if somebody's really good, then shouldn't they be on the team and it's just not happening. Like I go to a show and it's just us. Like, there's no press, there's no buyers. It's like as if it never happened

4 (1m 1s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how tell far Clemens and Baba grad boy came together to build telephonic a fashion brand that started in the clubs and side streets of New York city and grew into a global phenomenon. A few years ago, celebrities started to be photographed with a particular handbag. It was shaped like a shopping bag. So think a Bloomingdale's type bag, but with two sets of straps, one set to hang over your shoulder.

4 (1m 47s):
The other to clutch in your hand, embossed on the bag was the letter T artfully and symmetrically inserted inside the letter C the T stands for tell far the sea for Clemens tell far Clemens has become one of the hottest fashion designers in the U S over the past few years, his brand logo, the tea inside the C seems like it's everywhere. Look around, you'll see it on t-shirts on sweatpants, on hats, even on the uniforms worn by employees at white castle. It's almost as if tell far appeared out of nowhere, except that Telfair Clemens has been designing and selling his apparel and accessories for more than 15 years.

4 (2m 31s):
But for much of that time, till far, his work was largely ignored by the taste-makers in the fashion industry. And a big part of the brand success has come from a deliberate strategy of working outside. And at times against the fashion industry tell far in his creative partner, Baba grad boy, don't go to the met gala. They don't attend the major fashion shows and they don't price their products beyond the reach of most consumers. The designs are simple genderless, and as Telfair his tagline says not for you for everyone, the story of how Telfair got to where he is, is not a simple one to tell is he and buyback reminded me during the interview.

4 (3m 16s):
There's an easy version, basically young man, child of immigrants, struggles in the big city eventually redefines the concept of luxury and then makes it big. And part of that interpretation is real, but there's another part of the story, a more complicated one, the story of two outsiders who are shut out of an industry with specific rules and codes who then rejected the system that supported all of that and charted their own path on their own terms. <em></em> first met Tel far in the early two thousands, but he didn't start working with a designer until a few years later. We'll hear a lot more from Babak later in the interview, but for now we'll be hearing a lot from Telstar.

4 (3m 60s):
He spent much of his early life in Liberia, but his family eventually fled the civil war there and moved to Gaithersburg a suburb just outside Washington, DC.

2 (4m 12s):
I just remember taking ESL classes at different language courses because people couldn't understand what I was saying because my accent was really thick at the time. You know, also I used to have this like condition that my eyes would water. So people constantly thought I was lost in trouble. And then also, you know, like when they heard my accent, I was just like, it's like, people are constantly trying to help me that, that I did not need help from, or

4 (4m 40s):
Yeah. Were most of your parents, friends when you were growing up in Gaithersburg librarians as well? Yeah.

2 (4m 47s):
Yeah. It was like a huge community of Liberians. I think that's like one of the big reasons that we ended up relocating there, I was actually only allowed to hang out with Liberian kids. It's like, my parents used to be like, oh no, you can't hang out with American kids. They're evil.

4 (5m 3s):
Yeah. What about religion? What are you guys religious?

2 (5m 7s):
Oh yeah. That's like such a big part. I went to church every Sunday. Wow. The most boring church ever, but really sweet, you know, like the music was just not, it didn't move me, but it was like a community of people that took care of each other. That's like where the food pantry is where, you know, and I don't know, just like a lot of support

4 (5m 30s):
I find in my interviews that middle school is the first time when most of us start to find things in our lives that are more interesting, more sophisticated music and

2 (5m 44s):
Color contacts,

4 (5m 46s):
Whatever it's like going to the shopping mall, whatever it might be. What do you remember about the things that you were interested in in middle school?

2 (5m 55s):
I feel like that's like what I really began to find myself, you know, because it was just, my parents were just like focused on you going to the best school possible. And so they were trying to get me into private school four years in Maryland and every single placement test that I would take, I would mark AA all the way down to the placement test. So I wouldn't get in.

4 (6m 19s):
You didn't want to go to a private school. I

2 (6m 21s):
Did not want to go to private school and I didn't want to go because you have to wear a uniform. Right. And my only thing that I was allowed to do was like, I was allowed to dress how I wanted to dress for the most part. You know, when did

4 (6m 33s):
You first start to get into clothes?

2 (6m 35s):
I think always, you know, like I wore a pair of Oshkosh. B'gosh like overalls. I was really specific about what I wanted to dress like, you know, and it was kind of like dressing, like a toy or like the idea of like, exactly like what you saw on TV, you know,

4 (6m 54s):
Would you have both of the buckles buckled up or would you ever have one

2 (6m 59s):
Again at the beginning? Have you watched drop-off for grass? But at first it was just like neat tidy, you know, later in middle school, before I went to high school, it was like only designer things. It was like, I wanted to wear Calvin Klein. I wanted to wear iceberg. I wanted to wear Armani. I wanted to wear Dolce and Gabbana. You know, I used to want to go to like, like in DC particularly to go shopping because I was like, oh, Maryland. I wanted to see like real designer things. And like things that like, I couldn't find in like the mall.

4 (7m 30s):
How were you able to, to buy it? I mean, I'm assuming that your parents, they were middle-class right. Because your dad and I had a job.

2 (7m 39s):
Yeah. I worked at a daycare center. My aunt actually like ran, you know, that also my little brother went to, so I don't know how I afforded it, but I did. I saved money for diesel jeans. I saved money if I don't check, go out and say I'm no.

4 (7m 56s):
And, and as you kind of got more and more to fashion, did it create tension with your parents? Were they, yeah. How so?

2 (8m 5s):
I would say like the sexier, I want to dress or the more feminine influences that I had on dressing, they were completely against it. They're like used to like a world of like, oh, that man's suit is so beautiful. The cut of that suit, you know, that's what they consider it to be fashion. And I'm like, oh, I want low-rise jeans that are really ripped. And I want my shirt to say bitch on it and be three sizes too small.

4 (8m 29s):
Yeah. It sounds like even though there was some tension between you and your parents, that it was a very loving relationship. Is that fair to say yes.

2 (8m 37s):
Yeah, totally. To loving, to loving. It's like, I'm looked after heavily, you know, and I needed to look after myself in the way that I needed to be looked out there. You know, not like someone telling me what to do, but more like me knowing what I wanted do and doing it on my own. Yeah.

4 (8m 58s):
I'm just totally blown away at how confident you seemed to have been at such a young age too, because what, you know, a lot of kids in, in the pride less so today, but definitely then, and when I was in high school and it was easier to just conform right. To just wear jeans and a t-shirt and not to stand out. But it sounds like you were really comfortable already at 14, 15 expressing yourself through clothing and, and not, I guess not being worried about what other kids said or, or were you,

2 (9m 32s):
I think I probably was. That's why I finished school early. Got it. Got out of there and got around people that I felt like I was more like, you know, I dunno, like also too, it was like, I grew up very, I dunno what I was going to be, but I was like, I'm not going to be hanging out in Maryland. It's like, I had already seen New York. I used to go there every weekend. You know, I saw what people were up to. So I was just like, this shit is not for me. You know, like literally the day that I graduated high school was the day that I moved. Like the first chance that I got, I was out.

4 (10m 6s):
So you knew till far, you knew already in high school that you were going to get out of the suburbs and go to a city and probably New York and clothing was a way that you express yourself, but it doesn't sound like at that point in your life, you knew that you were going to go into the clothing world. Right. I mean, you kind of had a, or am I wrong? I mean, did you, was that something that already, as a teenager, you thought I really liked?

2 (10m 32s):
I mean, okay. So right before I moved to Maryland, I would say like,

4 (10m 37s):
We moved to

2 (10m 37s):
New York. You mean right before I moved to New York, sorry, kind of senior year of high school. I met this group of like young designers in DC. One of them's name is Jonathan Nelson, forgot what their line was called. They had me cause they're librarian also. And I forget how I got hooked up with them, but like they showed me like t-shirt printing operation that they had. And like, as I was going away to college, they gave me this entire bag of these Bob Marley t-shirts that they had he pressed. And he gave me a bunch of just like the prints. And I ended up cutting them up and I made this collection of stuff that I sold on the street.

2 (11m 21s):
Like I just basically deconstructed these t-shirts to me, this collection of clothes,

4 (11m 26s):
You would, you would literally take the, these t-shirts that you got from these guys in DC and just kind of very gently cut the along the seams and you can construct the shirts into parts and then reconstruct them into different garments, dresses,

2 (11m 43s):
T-shirts skirts, backpacks, motorcycle jackets, you know,

4 (11m 49s):
Can I ask you, can I ask you kind of it as sort of a weird, I don't, maybe it's not a dumb question. How did you know how to, so

2 (11m 56s):
I got a machine, like, I guess like the first time that black Friday ever happened, I was in New Jersey and we went to a Walmart there and I bought a machine for like $150. And it was like right after my grandmother had passed who also, she had a sewing school in Liberia. She always wanted to, so our clothes and we're just like, oh, can we go to the gap and get whatever we want? She was like, if I have my way out, so all of you guys as close, we were like, no, but like strangely right after she died, I took up sewing and my aunt Musu, she showed me how to, so it was bad. Like I was bad at it, but I knew how to like thread a bobbin and put it thread in a machine.

2 (12m 39s):
And I was deconstructing clothes by that time. So I was like seeing how they were put together. So I began to just like, you know, put things back together and I still didn't really know. And I still continued doing that all through college.

4 (12m 52s):
How did you just, you just figured it out. I mean, because sewing like any craft carpentry or, or, or any, anything, any art, anything it's, it's very complicated and it kind like anything. I mean, you said, you said you were bad at it at the beginning

2 (13m 7s):
And I'm still bad at it. Like I can't sell for shit and I wouldn't want to that's when I, you know, I really like, you know, I'm blessed enough to have like great people that work with me to make things the way, how it should be made. But I was like, you know, the roughness about what I was doing at that time though. I really do appreciate because I'm still like that to this point that I'm like, just rip that thing and it needs to be bigger here and less there. And that's what I want it to look like. You know? And I don't think you need any kind of formal training to do that, or necessarily it's like sometimes ripping something and to telling someone to do that thing that you just did is like the thing that you need to do, you know, to, to get what you want. It's not a refined thing. And I don't think my craft is such a refined craft.

2 (13m 50s):
It's like, it really comes from taking things apart and putting them back together in a non-traditional way.

4 (13m 55s):
So the, the story that that I've read is that you went to New York because you, you were going to enroll in pace at pace university in the fall to study, and she studied business and accounting. And, and that you, you moved in with, with, with one of your aunts in Queens, but that summer before you started college, you started to sell your, the garments that you would make from these t-shirts on the, on Laurie's side, on Mulberry street, you would just set up like a table on the street. And the

2 (14m 31s):
Great advice from Jonathan Nelson, he was like, go to the lower east side. That's the bargain district. He was like, yo, you can get like a lot of t-shirts there. So I was walking down orchard street with like a bag of my stuff. Cause I would do that every single day. You would go

4 (14m 47s):
Down, I would go

2 (14m 49s):
Walking around to stores and ask for the buyer again. This was like, Jonathan Nelson was like, yeah, just go to a store and ask her to buy. I was like, really? You just go there and ask her to buy it. It's like, yeah, just show them what you got. You know,

4 (15m 1s):
You were 17. I think I was

2 (15m 4s):
18. Yeah.

4 (15m 6s):
18. It's quite amazing. I mean, were you nervous? I think of myself as an 18 year old and I think I'd be so nervous to walk in and think, oh, are they going to like talk to me? I'm just a kid. And yeah.

2 (15m 17s):
I mean, also too, like I had this whole thing, I wouldn't tell anyone how old. I was like my best friends. They didn't know I was 18 until I was 21. You know? Like they thought I was 21 the whole time, because I always just immediately would just feel like this amount of disrespect. When you told someone that was 25, that you were 18, you know? So I just didn't tell anybody how old I was, especially people that are older.

4 (15m 44s):
So when you were, when you got to New York and you started to, you know, to, to take your designs to the Lori side, you're 18, what would you say when you would walk into the stores? You would say, hi, I'm, TeleVox Clemons, I'm a designer. This is my line. But what was your, what was your pitch?

2 (16m 0s):
I think it was, but that I mostly go to stores that they were doing consignment at that time. It was like seven at a store called funky LA. The store was cool. Like I had like all these like kind of ripped denim skirts and like scented shoes. It was just like, they just had all this cool vintage stuff and they were also selling designer stuff in there. So it was that store, funky LA. It was vice the vice store,

4 (16m 24s):
The vice store. Right. The vice magazine they have store initially. Yeah. And how, what, where were you drawing your inspiration from? Like, because I think initially you really were working with like, t-shirts

2 (16m 35s):
Right. T-shirts t-shirt and jeans. Cause

4 (16m 38s):
They were, I mean, they were basic. I'm trying to picture them. I mean, they were Bob Marley t-shirts

2 (16m 44s):
No, no, no. This was like those Bob barley t-shirts only lasted me. Like I think I sold them all. Like the first month that I got to New York, it was just like anything that was like deconstructed vintage stuff. I would go vintage shopping. Like I would go all the way out to like places or you buy clothes by the pound and buy like a bunch of blue denim, you know? And a lot of the things that I would make did not exist.

4 (17m 10s):
Like what do you remember?

2 (17m 11s):
I like one of the pieces that like was the thing that I was like, okay, this is a business or it, it has potential to be financially beneficial to me, you know? So I would buy these three X t-shirts and put them together into a triple t-shirt.

4 (17m 29s):
And just to create an image in the mind's eye. When you describe a triple t-shirt, I think what you're describing is something that went down was like vertical, right?

2 (17m 39s):
It had three holes. So you would take three t-shirts together. I would chop the right arm off of one, the left arm off of another and make a triangle with the third one and connect all of that together where your two arms would come out of the neck hall and you could wear them multiple Nicole's. Like I was making this all through college. That's like what I was making for people to wear. That's what I've met some of my best friends wearing.

4 (18m 4s):
And so it had multiple, like the neck hole was designed for the arms. So it was different than just like an oversized single t-shirt. Cause it sounds like when you would lift your arms up, it almost would have this kind of flowing kind of profile.

2 (18m 19s):
Yeah. But you could also wear it another way too, that you would wear asymmetric and you would have a t-shirt arm and a neck and then a very long shape on one side. And,

4 (18m 29s):
And you were just making clothing in your aunt's apartment, like with your sewing

2 (18m 35s):
Machine? No, I was at a dorm room time. You were

4 (18m 38s):
Making it in your dorm

2 (18m 39s):
Room. You were. Yeah.

4 (18m 41s):
Wow. All right. So you are, I mean, you're like 18, 19, you're a student at pace university go into class and also designing clothing that was appearing in some small boutiques. I'm just trying to imagine, like, if I knew you then, and I was like, Hey, tell me a little bit by yourself, how far and new say, yeah, I'm, you know, I'm designing some clothing and yes, some of it's in this boutiques in New York that would have been like really impressed. I mean, that, that's how

2 (19m 10s):
It was five. Like I did not talk to people at school. Like I went to school at six in the morning and mind my business, you know, and also too, at that time I started to hang out at clubs and I noticed that you could get paid at night by, by deejaying, by hosting a party by just showing up.

4 (19m 30s):
It seems to me like you will also have real ambitions that you were really thinking about you and what you were going to do with your life and that you were creating something bigger. Is that it's a true or, or, or, or where you not quite, was it not quite formed?

2 (19m 48s):
No, I like, at a certain point, I was like, I want to do this. And I want to begin to, it began with like, oh, making seasonal collections and doing a show to be able to achieve getting respect from people that were in the fashion industry and that do do this. So it's like after I had started making things out of like fabric and I had an account advice, vice magazine, vice magazine, and the vice store, which was like my main account at that time, vice and funky LA

4 (20m 19s):
Were you making money off of it, serious money or, or

2 (20m 26s):
Enough to eat enough to enough to buy a dumplings dollar dump legs,

4 (20m 31s):
You know, how much were they selling your shirts for? Do you remember?

2 (20m 34s):
I was selling sweatshirts and stuff from maybe like $150, $170. It was on consignment too. So I was probably getting all of that. He's worked

4 (20m 45s):
Sweatshirts that you were creating, that you were stitching and you were designing. Each one was handmade.

2 (20m 52s):
They were handmade. And then I met a brother and sister company. They were called PVR menswear and they had closed that were at the Mulberry street market. And I was like, wow, their clothes are cool. And I bought like a shirt one time and like we became friends and then I was like, Hey, do you, what do you guys think about, you know, sewing does triple t-shirts and the sweatshirts for like these vice orders that are beginning to sell. And they were just like the sweetest people. So they began to do all of the, you know, sewing and things just from their improved.

4 (21m 27s):
It kept you at it and going, because it sounds like you were really grinding and just you're making clothing, you've got stuff in consignment shops. You're deejaying, you're designing. I mean, but you weren't quite breaking through yet. What was it in your mind that enabled you to continue to just kind of push through that?

2 (21m 51s):
I kinda, I would look at what was going on around me and realize that even more, I needed to do this, you know what I mean? Cause you know, I had people around me like in my close circle that were ready for what was going on and then everybody else in the fashion industry and I was completely not, you know? Yeah. It was specifically like I was making, you know, it was like split pants, you know, it was like really like post-apocalyptic in this way that it was converse sneakers that the toe was cut out. So th I was called them to Mandel. It was like the toe and the tongue was kinda

4 (22m 28s):
Toes pointing out from the front.

2 (22m 31s):
Yeah. Your toes are pointing out for the front. And the back of your heel was out,

4 (22m 35s):
Took this like sandals.

2 (22m 36s):
So it was like, it was like a sandal made out of converse sneakers. And I was just really raw, you know, it was like, really like, I'm so inspired by a certain look. That's almost like you can't tell if the person's cleaning the house or if they own the house. You know,

4 (22m 52s):
I looked at so many images of your designs. And as you know, Norma Kamali was a guest on our show a year ago. And I think somebody who, whose work you really respect. And one of the things that I think is very similar about the clothing that you both produce is that comfort is a huge part of your design aesthetic.

2 (23m 14s):
Yeah. I think that that's like kind of, that's when I can draw the distinction between what I think is fashion and what fashion is, you know, there's like, I'm usually on the opposite side and it's like, what you're wearing before you got dressed. It's like the thing that you're wearing every single day, because you just know that that's, it's like, damn I look good. That's like your actual person. And then fashion is like, oh yeah, red carpet. My feet are bleeding. My Tsipras caught, I tripped over my train. You know, all of that.

4 (23m 44s):
Meanwhile, wow. You're still in college. I think you, you start doing a few small shows around the city, right?

2 (23m 51s):
Yeah. I basically started making clothes and doing runway shows two times a year. And you know, it was like small interactions. Sometimes there were videos. I would have a club night where people would come and see this video of a collection that I made. And I was like, you know, there's no line that was unisex at that time, that was coming from the place that mine was. Everything was like, oh, a tress on a man. Vent. Unisex is like,

4 (24m 22s):
It was important for you from the beginning. Not to be limited by gender specific clothing

2 (24m 28s):
Specifically because yeah, I was just limited by it at every way. You know, it's like, there's so many things you can't do because you're not this person or this thing or that thing, you know, I just wanted the thing that you make your mind up about what you're going to be and making things that did not exist. You know, it's like at that time I would go to the fashion archives every single day in,

4 (24m 48s):
In Manhattan,

2 (24m 49s):
In Manhattan at Gallagher's I would be there every single day in between classes, just looking at magazines and stuff. So I was determined on also not repeating some shit that I just saw in a magazine, you know, I was like, oh, he did that. He did that. He did that. That's like, when I got to know every single designer, you know,

4 (25m 7s):
You were doing like some pretty serious sort of scholarly kind of re I mean, you were going there looking for, cause this is a very serious business. Like where people write Pitt books about fashion, go and great designers go. I mean, you were serious. You were really serious about this.

2 (25m 26s):
If there's one thing that I do love, I think I love fashion. And that's why I never went to fashion school because I knew once it was a task that I had to do with a certain grade that it would get from someone, but based on doing something that they liked me doing, I was like, no, I would have figured it out on my own. I want to do it wrong. Because I, at that time, my aunt, she was like, you should really go to fit. And she was trying to get me into fit. I was like, no, I think I'm just going to finish a patient's like, you're not going to learn anything. I was like, yeah, I don't want to learn anything from there either. You know, it's like I wanted to get it wrong because I was already making money, getting it wrong.

4 (26m 8s):
When we come back in just a moment, how tell far finds a creative partner who not only loves and admires his work, but who knows how to get it seen and sold, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR Support for this podcast and the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform that puts creators in control. If you're the creator of an e-commerce brand, you need a platform that hustles as hard as you do, Klaviyo unlocks the power of your e-commerce data.

4 (26m 49s):
So you can personalize and automate messages that keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Klaviyo, get started for free@klaviyo.com slash NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, LinkedIn, this black history month, as we reflect on trailblazing, historical figures, LinkedIn is also celebrating those working to build a better tomorrow. That's why they're sharing the journeys of black entrepreneurs who started with a vision and then inspired and championed by the communities around them. They became success stories that inspire us all. Join the conversations happening on LinkedIn.

4 (27m 30s):
This month to learn more about black founders who are charting a new path, LinkedIn welcome professionals.

5 (27m 37s):
Some of us are rethinking how we spend our time.

6 (27m 41s):
It has its place in our lives, but it's not our whole reason for living.

3 (27m 46s):
I think play is fundamental. We just need to redefine what we call

5 (27m 52s):
A special three-part series. Work, play rest on the Ted radio hour from NPR.

4 (28m 3s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2004 and tell Farr is designing and showing some of us fashions in New York while still going to college. And this is right around the time he meets the guy who will become his creative director, Baba grad boy. Now just a bit of background about Baba before we get into it, he's the son of Iranian immigrants. And as a teenager, he was into computers and art and design. And he grew up in Seattle, a place where he was actually pretty unhappy.

3 (28m 35s):
I knew that I was not employable in Seattle, Seattle. I never agreed to growing up there to begin with, you know, I was born, you know, I mean, my earliest memories are from there. And the whole time I was like, this, can't be it. Like, this cannot possibly be it because I didn't have any space there. I always wanted to get out and I just didn't have any money or any prospects. And then I remember I did, you know, I was good at art and I think I did an album cover and I had 600 bucks and I bought a one-way ticket to New York. Can you say to what the album cover was?

3 (29m 16s):
It was an album cover to a modest mouse album,

4 (29m 20s):
Portland, Portland based band. Right? You did a modest mouse cover.

3 (29m 26s):
Cool. There's the moon and Antarctica, I think. Wow. But I basically, yeah, I bought a one-way ticket over here. I was dating a girl who had moved out here and then within two weeks, three weeks, I got a making concept art for TV commercials. Hmm. I had my whole plan of how I was going to do New York, which was like, not going exactly how I thought. Cause I just thought my whole mind was about like I was going to do commercial art direction. Cause I was really good at it. I was going to make a lot of money doing boring shit and then use that money to do the things I want to do. It never occurred to be that doing the things that I wanted to do were the same thing directly.

3 (30m 10s):
Yeah. And so the first couple months, I just remember going to work every day, having no money. I was like Canada to, to did waiting for the first paycheck. And then you get the paycheck and you don't have a bank account.

4 (30m 26s):
Hmm. And how about you tell far, how are you making a living at that time? Like after you graduated from college, were you, how were you earning money?

2 (30m 36s):
I was deejaying and I had my consignment. Right. And you know, I was living in an apartment. That was what I think like seven or $800 a month. I had no heat. So that was what, and I could pay at the end of the month instead of the beginning because I had no heat and that's how I did it. You know, it was like really just tough and like extremely tough

4 (30m 59s):
So far at this point. Still you just, you. Yeah.

2 (31m 3s):
Yeah. Jason, for rare also too was helping me style stuff at that time. It was like, I would work with people after I was kind of done making the clothes.

4 (31m 13s):
Also the sales rep, you were the sales guy, the marketing guy. You were the CEO. The designer.

2 (31m 22s):
Yeah, I would, I would, I wouldn't tell anyone who would ever speaking to, so I would just sign everything capital, all capital tell far that just sounded like

4 (31m 30s):
It was somebody from this huge warehouse of designers,

2 (31m 35s):
Artists at that time too. It was like really hard to make production of anything that I made, you know? Cause I was getting the fabric as a gift from Supima, you know, I couldn't afford the fabric that they were giving

4 (31m 47s):
Me. They would gift it to you just like samples of it.

2 (31m 51s):
Yeah. I would go to a Supima apartment and they would give me one roll of like dis striped fabric to make it was enough to make a sample out of it. But it wasn't enough for me to, oh yeah. A store came in, ordered 60 units of it. It's like, well, I couldn't do that with like certain collections and I really wanted to push each collection. So, you know, sometimes the idea would sacrifice me being able to actually make it, you know,

4 (32m 17s):
Do you remember tell far, I mean, you, you have such a bright and sunny disposition, but I wonder if at that time, cause I'm trying to channel back to that time in my life. And there's a lot of uncertainty in your twenties and early thirties when you're trying to kind of build your career and it's scary. And I wonder if you ever experienced anxiety or sadness. Yeah.

2 (32m 41s):
I mean completely, it was like a thing that I would make a show and do all the things that will go into a show and you know, you try to get, press people to cover it. They wouldn't, you try to get buyers to buy it. They wouldn't. So I'm like, damn, how am I going to do this next thing? So I was like kind of in this way, waiting for someone to like some investor to come in or like some store to give me a check to make this thing. And I'm just like, I'm going to make these things and if nobody buys it, I'm going to wear it. You know, I love that. And literally I would make that shit in my size and I would have, I still do.

4 (33m 18s):
I think the two of you met for the first time around 2004, 2005, just from what I gather, you don't even remember when he first met, is that right?

2 (33m 29s):
Well, we used the heck out a lot. What's each other on the street and like hang out in Tompkins square park on a number like of,

3 (33m 39s):
If it's a group of people who are looking for something different period, right. I want to hear some music, but it's something different. I want to hang out with some people, but not like people I seen before. I didn't think of the world in terms of like a fashion industry or starting a business. What was real to us was like this, the context that we were in and how people looked

2 (34m 5s):
His haircuts are really

3 (34m 6s):
Cool. And I feel like that's my memory of Telfair is like this particular person looks ways that I can't describe, you know, I don't, I don't know where the coordinates of this look are.

4 (34m 23s):
And I think, I think around this time, like tough are, you were still doing small fashion shows around, around New York. And I guess you were also hanging out with a stylist named Aveena Gallagher. And this is somebody who would become an incredibly important partner to both of you because a buyback, you, you wound up marrying her and tough, tougher. I think Aveena eventually became the stylist for the brand, right? Yeah.

2 (34m 47s):
Like literally she was around and I would see her around a lot. I didn't even know what a stylist was until I met her. I didn't know what they did, you know? And then like one time I remember looking in a magazine and it had her name on it, but I was just like, oh shit, Aveena saw that. Like

4 (35m 4s):
She does. And you were working with her, she was working with you as your stylist. But from what I understand, like she wasn't cause you didn't have any money, right? No, she wasn't. She wasn't showing you anything. Right. She was kind of a friend. Yes. This

2 (35m 18s):
Was like my one friend. I was like, yo, I'm doing a show.

4 (35m 21s):
Yeah. So it was more of a casual like, yeah, I can help you. No problem.

3 (35m 25s):
Yeah. Yes. It was just a bunch of friends getting together to do something. Cool.

4 (35m 30s):
What did you, when you said, you know, I think I want to work with this with the sky. What did, what in your mind did you think that you could, you could do?

3 (35m 38s):
Well, my, my experience of it was to go to shows, see this thing and then be mad because I was just mad that that wasn't enough to get the recognition, to get some kind of support, to get

4 (35m 52s):
Glee, be going to doing these fashion shows. And it was like a tree falling in a forest and nobody was around to hear it.

3 (35m 59s):
Like that was amazing. Okay. Let's

4 (36m 2s):
Go. People were saying, how is this not getting attention? This is such interesting clothing.

3 (36m 8s):
Yeah. And this is, you know, like fashion is like, it's like a more subjective form of like sport let's say. And if somebody's really good, then shouldn't they be on the team is like, this is the one. Right. And it's just not happening. The press are like, I go to a show and it's just us. Like, there's no press, there's no buyers. You know, it's like as if it never happened.

4 (36m 30s):
And you're trying to get the attention of like the famous fashion Myers, like Robin or Chavon or the Washington post, or

3 (36m 36s):
We will go for the unfamous ones. You have to understand that when people, you know, you have these institutions like Vogue and style.com and they're like the library of Congress of fashion. So they, your entry means that you happened. So when they refuse to even record that you had a show, they are saying that you don't exist.

4 (36m 54s):
I don't exist. What's so it's really the gatekeepers in that world at that time. And maybe even today, we're pretty powerful.

3 (37m 3s):
Yeah. But at the same time, we probably were completely misunderstanding what was happening. Right. Because we're thinking, oh, this brand is so popular because of how cool this show was. Right. So if we do a show that's even cooler, We're going to get it to that. Is that, you know,

4 (37m 25s):
You were by like, you were frustrated because you knew that there was something here that wasn't getting the attention it deserved and you thought maybe you could help.

3 (37m 35s):
Yeah. I just thought that it was about communication because that's what I did. Right. I mean, when I came on to tafara, his logo was like written with a Sharpie and his press kit was designed by a DJ. And like, there wasn't any of that basic infrastructure that could help you navigate within our scene. And so I really, the first show we did together was we started in 2013 when we did the SS 2014 collection. And it seemed like a really big show. Right. We entered into this new phase of like, how do you get the free space? How do you get a 20 foot led screen for free shipped to you?

3 (38m 19s):
You know, like it was, how do you get a video for free? Okay, we're going to reach out to the museum of contemporary art LA, and you're going to write a paragraph around why this is important and why you have to support it and what it means, like all that communication.

4 (38m 31s):
So in other words, it wasn't about having a press strategy to reach out to reporters in the fashion press. But it was about actually reaching out to people outside the industry to support the work that the Telfer was doing.

3 (38m 46s):
It was all of those things. It was all of those things, you know, because you got to understand like Telfair is already doing everything that makes it what it is, and then has to do the job of explaining to someone who should be able to clearly see it in front of them, what it is in there, what it is that they're already looking at. And, you know, you're dealing with an all white industry, right. And who know it. Yeah. And you symbolize something specific. That's useful up into a point, you know, and if you have no choice, you can't choose your industry. So, you know, like I thought that there was enough wiggle room in communication to find a way through that gauntlet.

4 (39m 30s):
But that wasn't enough.

3 (39m 32s):
What we ended up doing is like almost operating like a festival because we would make money from doing shows

4 (39m 38s):
You, and you would make money by getting sponsors to sponsor your shows.

3 (39m 43s):
We were basically D absolute like premier artists of sponsor voodoo.

4 (39m 51s):
Yeah. So, all right. So the two of you are working together and you're working obviously on a new strategy. And I guess I think 2014 was, was a pretty important and pivotal moment because that year you approached Kmart to sponsor one of your shows, Kmart, which is the furthest brand from like London, from Paris and Milan, right? The furthest brand. You think of, when you think of like a Paris or Milan runway show Kmart to sponsor your fall 2014 collection, first of all, tell me about the, the idea of even approaching Kmart. Did they reach out to,

3 (40m 33s):
I think we might have reached out to them what happened was in those days, specifically hair and makeup sponsors paid for your show.

4 (40m 42s):
So like hair, like makeup brands, like Bobby Brown or

3 (40m 47s):
Mac,

4 (40m 47s):
I should say it. Okay.

3 (40m 49s):
And that was not an option for us, arguably because people in our shows had the wrong hair and skin and it was genderless. And, you know, for all the many reasons, it wasn't giving the type of thing they were selling. Right. Right. So as a reaction to that constraint, we just started reaching out to the exact opposite end of the spectrum. So we started, we were kind of like systematically reached out to like the worst possible spot from a fashion perspective.

4 (41m 25s):
I mean, so, so you, you end up working with Kmart. This is for the fall 2014 fashion show. And I think you put it up at the museum in New York. And I want to describe this for people to just walk me into that show, because from what I understand, it was like a mock Kmart, like kind of had a mock Kmart as you walked in. It was the

2 (41m 46s):
Introduction of the Telfair shopper.

3 (41m 49s):
We had, you know, like a tiny statues of every model in the show t-shirts of every model in the show, a seven foot Tel far at the end.

2 (41m 58s):
Yeah. There was a statue of me cause the collection was kind of based on size and proportions too. So like this whole idea of small, medium, large, we applied it to the club

4 (42m 9s):
As well. And your, and the clothing that you were designing for this show, did any, any of it have, did you try to kind of create a Kmart aesthetic in any way?

2 (42m 21s):
I made it and the fabrics that we're using kind of like, I think the closest thing was like polar fleece, you know, it would be like a lot with target.

3 (42m 30s):
And then we had produced the telephone bag, the shopping bag, and we put the entire production in the store. So it's like hundreds and hundreds of this bag, you know, for a brand that had never sold more than a dozen, a couple dozen of anything. I think we sold gift cards That didn't actually buy anything. It was literally a card you could give as a gift, but

2 (42m 57s):
It was $10, but it did nothing. And then the shopping bag was supposed to be the thing that you were going to put all of these gifts that you would buy at the gift shop in.

4 (43m 7s):
Hmm. And so after you did that show with, with Kmar, what, what happened? Like what, what, what kind of reaction did it get? I see,

2 (43m 16s):
I think that what show@thenewmuseumwasthefirsttimewegotonstyle.com. Yeah. That was the first,

4 (43m 23s):
The first time you got sort of mainstream press coverage.

2 (43m 26s):
Yeah. It was like some glowing review from like there, the style.com, whoever that person was at that time, that was just like, I can't believe that we've never featured this person before she's constantly emerging.

3 (43m 40s):
Right. And you know, all the reporting started to get really like, you know, evangelical at that point.

4 (43m 48s):
But what I'm, what I'm trying to get at is what did you, and you may not know. Right. Cause if somebody listening to this is trying to figure out how to do something similar. It's gonna want to know, like what, what was the turn? Was it, I mean, was it a, a convergence of things? Was it just that there were more websites coming online that were Cedar, there were more places where you could get coverage? Was it lack what,

2 (44m 12s):
Well, first off it wasn't just me anymore. I had other people that were, we were doing it, the quote unquote right way that we have to do,

3 (44m 22s):
You know, and this is the thing, if you're trying to make an argument around the listener, right? Like how did you build it? I would pause before saying that this is how you build it because that stuff worked and that stuff got us somewhere else, but it almost got us in the wrong place. Here's was a better place.

2 (44m 43s):
Yeah. Also too, we owed, we were tremendously in debt after doing that, you know, we didn't get that space for free. We had to pay for that. We, you know, it was like, I, and we do what we did want to have to do. Like, we didn't want to have to have an experience that was just overwhelmingly expensive for us to either recoup from, and we didn't really sell anything, you know? Yeah.

3 (45m 10s):
I mean, so the, you know, that's the thing, so, okay. Lesson one, should you start a company without any capital, even enough to just pay your own rent? You know, like we, the things we were doing in terms of communication with potential sponsors ended up becoming a revenue stream that let us do things at the absolute minimum of possibility that, I mean, that's, as much as I could say about it, it made it as impossible as it was for Telfair to do the collection before it was a little less impossible, right? Because now we had at least these budgets for shows and I could hire a producer and we could have, you know, it wasn't just our friends,

2 (45m 52s):
People doing

3 (45m 52s):
Favors. And even then it was still was famous. I would get this money from a museum, this money from this brand, this money from that brand, it was enough

2 (46m 2s):
To just

3 (46m 4s):
Like, at some point we were bringing in over a million dollars just from doing shows. So what you would consider marketing is actually it wasn't an expense. It was our income. And then the press is able to see what it would be like if you were allowed to do something,

4 (46m 20s):
This, from what I gathered this partnership with Kmart would lead to bold sort of a sponsorship and partnerships that you, you embarked on that the next one was with white castle, the

2 (46m 38s):
Restaurant, that's the first burger place that I ate when I came to America before I have McDonald's I wait council because it was cheaper. Yeah.

3 (46m 46s):
We reached out to white castle. In fact, we called, they're wanting a hundred line. They had a one 800

4 (46m 53s):
And you

3 (46m 54s):
Said, what was we have? We're having a fashion show in New York city for genders slash

4 (46m 59s):
Well, you've just got some customer service rep on the other line. Yeah. So you can call the one 800 number and the service. And you told the service per the customer agent like, Hey, we want to, we're doing a fashion show. We're looking for sponsorship.

3 (47m 11s):
Yes. And then the next call we'll we got a call from the vice president after that, from the

4 (47m 19s):
Vice president of like marketing or something. Yeah.

3 (47m 22s):
And the vice-president of white castle is an unusual person, like a kind of patron Saint of ours.

4 (47m 29s):
This is Jamie Richardson, Jamie Richardson.

3 (47m 32s):
And after that point, he's the pretty much the only person we talked to. I mean, he, he got very personally involved. I think, you know, we were writing, we had really good press kits where we would explain what this brand, what the proposition of this project is. And he responded to it.

4 (47m 51s):
Just curious, you guys contact white castle and say, Hey, we're doing a fashion show. We'd love for you to sponsor it. You were not at that point, a hugely well-known brand. What was it that prompted Jamie Richardson, vice president, white castle, to call you back and treats talk more.

3 (48m 10s):
My dude, they funded the Harold and Kumar movie from the same one, $800.

4 (48m 15s):
They funded that movie.

3 (48m 17s):
They had never made a film before.

2 (48m 19s):
And the person that did it was Jamie. So we're

3 (48m 22s):
Dealing with an unusual

4 (48m 25s):
Harold and Kumar go to white castle. He, they had sponsored that film or, okay. So they had already done some wild things.

2 (48m 33s):
Yeah. But he's, he's a really cool person.

4 (48m 36s):
You ended up doing your spring, summer 2016 collection, you ended up doing that show sponsored by white castle. And you had your after party, the fashion after-party at white castle in times square,

2 (48m 48s):
Which was Jamie's idea by the way, Jamie idea.

3 (48m 54s):
I was the one saying, do you have permits for

2 (48m 57s):
The

4 (48m 58s):
Like fashion models and you know, just beautiful people at white castle in times square

2 (49m 4s):
And our entire cast and crew, we allowed the public. That was just there to have that. Yeah. And it just ended up being like the best party. Like the workers there got the party with us. Jamie was doing the light show

3 (49m 20s):
By turning them off and on. Yeah. The workers were all dancing behind the counter.

4 (49m 25s):
Did you have champagne inside the white castle where you popping champagne course champagne and

2 (49m 31s):
Orange soda

3 (49m 32s):
At the soda fountain. So you can serve

2 (49m 34s):
Yourself

3 (49m 36s):
In the cups that

4 (49m 37s):
They have and just what goes better with a few glasses of champagne, then a few white castle cheeseburgers,

2 (49m 45s):
Champagne is later,

3 (49m 47s):
But I have to explain like that party, you know, that became like the kind of signature where it just felt like your TV was broken. You know, like it really felt like this. How does this happen? It didn't feel completely planned. You know what I mean? It's the type of thing that like, this is where things kind of changed

4 (50m 11s):
When we come back in just a moment, how the collaboration with white castle and with Kmart led to two iconic new looks for tell bar, including one item that suddenly everyone seemed to want tell far back, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, the American express business platinum card, which is packed with features like 1.5 times a membership rewards points on big purchases and in select business categories over $1,000 in statement credits per year with select business partners and five times membership rewards points on flights and prepaid hotels booked through Amex travel.com.

4 (51m 1s):
Get the card built for business by American express terms. And point cap apply. Learn more@americanexpress.com slash B platinum support for this NPR podcast. And the following message come from bubble.io, a no-code platform that enables you to build launch and scale real ideas and products without investing thousands of dollars on engineers or wasting time trying to code it yourself, join over 1 million builders and use bubble's drag and drop tool to develop and launch custom interactive multi-user web apps in hours go to bubble.io/npr. And the first 500 listeners will get their first month free on any of bubbles paid plans.

4 (51m 49s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2017. And after collaborating on shows with Kmart and white castle Tovar is starting to get more attention in the fashion world. And as a brand it's still pretty small, but after that showed white castle, something kind of unexpected happens that led white castle to then ask you to redesign their employee uniforms. Yes.

2 (52m 18s):
So like, kinda like after we did such a beautiful party, they were like, what do you think about making the,

4 (52m 27s):
And this was just for the employees. This was not going to be something I know a limited number were were sold, but this was not made to be sold to the general public. Yeah. I think

2 (52m 38s):
This was just for the employee. As, at first

4 (52m 40s):
You can buy on the secondary market, a Telfair white castle hoodie for more than a hundred dollars

2 (52m 49s):
The board at a hundred.

3 (52m 53s):
And you know, so I would say the thing that people really heard about was that we designed the uniform, but what started to kind of form our approach to these collaborations is that we produced the uniform. That is the difference. You know,

4 (53m 7s):
Why is that a to explain that to me, instead of somebody else producing them, you yourself, finance the production of them.

3 (53m 14s):
Well, think, you know, these things are usually for show, therefore press is just, you want a press release saying that happened. And then you get a little check for your design fee. The way that we approached it was, you know, we were a brand. I think that that season, we maybe had $60,000 in orders. You

4 (53m 31s):
See we're small.

3 (53m 33s):
Oh my God, we making like maybe 200 garments, right? So with white castle, we had the opportunity to make unisex clothes for a 20,000 unit order

2 (53m 44s):
In multiple sizes, men and women,

4 (53m 47s):
You went and found the factory to make them and to produce them

2 (53m 51s):
In our factory that made our collection in China.

3 (53m 55s):
So we became a supplier to white castle and they're renewing them every, you know, six months. And like that became a revenue stream, not just to kind of press

4 (54m 6s):
Right, because normally would happen as a designer would just send the design in and walk away and then they would handle it. The customer would just, they would get, get it made for them. But this way you not only have the design, but you control the production,

3 (54m 19s):
Which in those days was, you know, that's like, that was a lifeline. Yeah.

4 (54m 24s):
So one thing that we, we kind of, I think alluded to, but didn't really go into in depth was at your Kmart show in 2014. One of the things that you guys had on display were shopping bags. Yes. And you really just had them there. I think as part of the show, you hadn't started making them to sell them. And I guess for a variety of reasons, including just the financing of it, but in 2017, you won a prestigious award for your work. This was the, the CFDA Vogue fashion fund. And that came with a $400,000 prize. And, and I guess you decided to use that money to finance, what would become probably your most famous product today?

4 (55m 9s):
The Telfair shopping bag. Tell me about the Genesis of that.

2 (55m 14s):
Well, this idea totally came from like the holidays. He said, like, I was like walking in Soho and Jesse, everybody consuming like the lives dependent on that. So it was like men and women walking with like six shopping bags with all different sizes. I was like, wow, they look so beautiful. That looks so rich. It looks so wealthy. They look Salva careless, like just seeing this person smiling with a line of bags and a big fur coat was like, you know, I was like, Ooh, fab, you know, like that. I was like, wow, I wish people were carrying a shopping bag to hide my name on it. And what people had like two shopping bags. So I was like, yeah, it's like the one bag that just, everybody looks so good with.

4 (55m 56s):
It's like shopping, like the Bloomingdale's shopping

2 (55m 58s):
Specifically. The Bloomingdale's one small, like, cause they had a big brown bag, little round bag. So they had all of the sizes of bags

4 (56m 6s):
And I was like, and everybody looks good. Or

2 (56m 8s):
Even like a man that's carrying his wife's bag looks so good. A baby looks so good carrying that bag.

4 (56m 13s):
And for people that don't know what this bag looks like, obviously you can Google it, but it's a very simple bag. It's a very simple functional handbag with two straps, a strap to carry by with your hands and then a larger shop, if you want to pray over your shoulder and it has your logo embossed in the center of it, it's fair description that fair. And these were made out of leather initially, right.

2 (56m 40s):
There were auras made out of always Egan leather or poly urethane.

4 (56m 43s):
Okay. And when you relaunched this or really launched this in a big way, they sold out, it was like a, and by the way, they weren't crazy expensive. Right? I mean, I think that they range from 140 to $240. And like that,

3 (56m 58s):
That was a big part of it is that Telfa wanted to base the price on how much you would make in a night DJ. And that absolutely didn't square up with how much it costs like at all. But it's like the price of the bag was part of the concept and design of the bag, even though you weren't making money on that.

4 (57m 19s):
And, and, and you had the manufactured in China. All right. I think it's fair to say the bag really was kind of like a stratospheric leap for you for your brand. I know you were selling them in small quantities for a few years, but you really launched it in a much bigger way in 2018. Is it fair to say that that year was sort of a turning point in your public profile? The profile of the brand that tell far really became a much, much bigger brand around 2018 through the relaunch of the bag a

2 (57m 56s):
Much more accessible around,

3 (57m 58s):
I mean, it's, I don't, it didn't feel like that's how it happened. Right. Because it took time, like, you know, it doesn't fly off the shelves. We're still only making like a few thousand dollars a month. Right, right. Through 2018 and into 2019. So do you know what I mean? Like it's,

4 (58m 16s):
What was the turning point? What was the thing? I mean, obviously we not, obviously I should say Oprah eventually named it as one of her favorite things. And, but that wasn't until 2020, but what, what was the, the thing that made this bag become such a huge, like Beyonce and Alexandra, Ocasio, Cortez, and all these amazingly famous people who had this bag and, and talking about it, what, what was it, do you, do you even know?

2 (58m 44s):
I think like a lot of people is like, is, is a viral motion to how the bag grew because people took a picture with it online. And that meant a thing to them and the people that carry it and the people that see each other carrying it, or there'll be completely different people that have nothing to do with each other, carrying a bag. And they look at each other and they're like, oh wow, everybody has it. You know, like, it's this kind of conversation. It wasn't overnight like, oh, everything's sold out. And it's like, bags were out. We gave bags to people, you know, like, and that was the thing to the power of gifting. It's like, if it means something to you, you give it to that person. You know what I mean? And we gifted a lot of things to our friends that they just actually became a staple.

2 (59m 26s):
They're like, I want a black one. Now, after you gave me this brown one, you know, or someone gave them their first, how far back they don't

3 (59m 32s):
By it. But it's the exact moments when we were getting the most recognition is when it felt like the environment was like more hostile. Now we were like, our success just meant that we were exploitable. Right. And we were navigating that world. You know, the, if we, if we want to tell the story about the baggage all wrapped up in these types of things, and there is a very specific underlying narrative to that.

4 (1h 0m 0s):
But Tommy, Tommy, the narrative, what does that note,

3 (1h 0m 3s):
I'll say, this, that we won the CFDA fashion fund a year to the day that Donald Trump was elected president. There was a need for a certain type of performance of inclusivity. And so there had to be the production of platforms and opportunities to get the right people, to say the things that needed to be said for people to feel like a progressive, you know, maybe they feel like they're part of some kind of resistance or that there is at least dignity too big at this place.

3 (1h 0m 44s):
But in any case, you know, it had a considerable effect on what you ended up seeing. If you look at a magazine before 2016, it's very easy to see an all white issue of any fashion magazine that wasn't even a question Dolan was there to correct.

4 (1h 0m 59s):
So just to clarify, it sounds like what you're saying is there was a very much a sort of a performative kind of aspect to trying to increase racial awareness and to examine the absence of diversity in mainstream institutions and as a result of that.

3 (1h 1m 22s):
So this is one factor that's at play. Right. Right. And when you really look at the term inclusion, it means that ownership doesn't change. Now you're just being allowed in.

4 (1h 1m 32s):
Right. Gotcha. Right. So that was the context of what was happening when you won the award.

3 (1h 1m 39s):
Yeah. And previous to that, the context was like, it was like hostile, you know what I mean? It was hostile and kind of every level, it was really, really difficult to do things. People didn't really want to work with you. The opportunities weren't really there. And then when things kind of changed over, it was kind of the same thing, but in a different way, like now you were exploitable. So someone would want to sign a contract with you where it's a 90 10 split, you know, and that's supposed to be success. Right. So then you're in a position where you're no longer trying to explain yourself, you're to say, how do I get, how do I stop talking to these people at all?

3 (1h 2m 23s):
And how do I talk to a different group of people? Like, is it possible to not go through these gates at all?

4 (1h 2m 29s):
So there were all of these, these, I mean, these things that were happening and sort of explain from your perspective, how you responded to that, or maybe didn't respond to that with what you were doing

3 (1h 2m 44s):
To look at like what we have that other people don't have. And part of that was just like the ability to take risks. So like, you know, in January, 2019, we wanted to kind of make our business practices, reflect the creative practices that we've been developing. And in order to do that, we wanted to, at that time, you know, our wholesale accounts were doubling every season.

4 (1h 3m 10s):
And that was your primary distribution channel. You were, you were doing wholesales sales and then retailers would sell your stuff. Absolutely.

3 (1h 3m 19s):
Okay. But we made the decision January, 2019, that by January, 2020, we would be completely out, which was a very difficult thing to do

4 (1h 3m 27s):
Out of the wholesale business. You would be directly selling to your customers. So you wouldn't be in stores anymore. You would not be in. Right. Okay.

3 (1h 3m 35s):
So we did that on a principle, but the way that, that set of decisions lined up with COVID was the fact is

4 (1h 3m 44s):
Exactly at the same time, because with COVID because you decided to go direct to consumer, you actually didn't have to rely on these stores that were essentially shut. Yeah.

3 (1h 3m 55s):
It's as if we'd prepared for, and not only that other brands had already invested millions into their next collection and we had already not been doing it.

4 (1h 4m 5s):
And just, I think just before the pandemic, like, like 2019 into 2020, you guys were doing pretty well. I think you hit about $2 million in sales and then something happened that got a lot of attention in, in the fashion world, because you had entered into a relationship with the gap. You were talking with them about like creating a line for them. And I think you got to the point where, where you both, you sign the agreement and in gap that the gap store in Paris even showed photos of, of a Telfair show. And they plastered the, the windows with them. And, and the head of gap was like, oh, he was talking about tell far, and this is the future and I'm blah, blah, blah.

4 (1h 4m 46s):
And then I think you had delivered like 30 designs to gap by the time the pandemic hit had hit and many retailers had shut their stores. Is that more or

3 (1h 4m 57s):
Less true? We did the collection. Yeah. All right.

4 (1h 5m 1s):
And, and you, weren't hearing back from gap and, and cause you had this collaboration, this design collaboration, and you didn't hear back from them and the person that you'd done the deal with was at it was, was fired or was, I dunno, what was, let go. And you would, and so you had put, you had to be paid, so you sent them an invoice and they,

3 (1h 5m 23s):
What, there wasn't a replied,

4 (1h 5m 25s):
That's the thing, there wasn't even a replying.

3 (1h 5m 28s):
It was in the middle of, I mean, everybody was shut down. Right?

2 (1h 5m 31s):
Yeah. And also to the team that we were working with was completely dismissed as that happened. So everybody that we were writing, we didn't have a point of contact. I think someone from gap actually wrote us to tell us like a little bit later that they had been, let go, if we needed any help, getting in contact with someone, they could put us in the direction.

4 (1h 5m 54s):
So no. Right. No contact from gap and G to be paid.

3 (1h 5m 60s):
Well, yeah, but this is like the month of March, like New York has shut down 22, like window. This is when it was really crazy. China's shut down. So we have nothing to sell and then we're not getting paid this thing and it doesn't seem like it's going to happen. You know, it was like a really scary moment for us, but that is the exact moment. It was the end of March where finally China opened up, we got a ship in a bags. We post a backdrop in the middle of this crazy pandemic

4 (1h 6m 32s):
Backdrop mean meaning that they're available on the website. Right.

3 (1h 6m 35s):
Okay. And those backdrops would usually last we'd put them up. I mean, they weren't really drops. Like they would last for like a month, you know, but in the middle of lockdown, we're all holding our breath after this drop. And they sold out in seconds,

4 (1h 6m 49s):
Just like, totally stunned was like, what's going on? We were

3 (1h 6m 52s):
Just on this.

4 (1h 6m 53s):
So in, in March of 2020, you work on your social media account, you just said, Hey, we have a backdrop, like they're available. And then somebody's like, you look at your website and you're like, we're sold out like a few hours later.

3 (1h 7m 7s):
No, they're gone in like seconds

4 (1h 7m 9s):
In like seconds, seconds. It goes like one minute. And how many bags were available?

3 (1h 7m 14s):
I don't

4 (1h 7m 15s):
Know. At that time hundreds,

3 (1h 7m 17s):
Well, it might've been like 1000 or something. And then so then we started air shipping the bags because we couldn't wait for the boat and then that one would sell out and the next, and it just kind of continued like that for a few months. So, you know, the context of us getting the bad news, we were kind of okay,

4 (1h 7m 38s):
Because the bags were selling. So meantime, you're selling bags. You're not hearing anything back from gap, which you had a design deal with. And then I don't remember exactly when, but in 2020 in the middle of the year, I think they announced a collaboration with Connie west. Did you, did that take you by surprise

2 (1h 8m 1s):
Earlier? Like when the world found out we found out and then people were on our timeline being like, wait, what happened to the tougher one? Twitter.

4 (1h 8m 13s):
They went bananas because they were like, wait a minute. What's going on with Telfair collaboration.

2 (1h 8m 19s):
Yeah. The TSC people got to the bottom of their

4 (1h 8m 22s):
Stands.

2 (1h 8m 23s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 8m 25s):
But at the same time we hated that because they made it about, they made it

2 (1h 8m 29s):
A competition, not a vicious and just

4 (1h 8m 32s):
Like a Yeezy versus telephonic kind of thing, which is not what I wanted

2 (1h 8m 37s):
Completely. It couldn't be a more obvious.

4 (1h 8m 40s):
But in the meantime, you hadn't been paid gap, didn't pay you. Yeah. So from my research that the, the tell far fans online, when they found out that you, you had not been paid by gap, they mounted a social media campaign and gap did actually pay you for your

3 (1h 8m 57s):
Work. Yeah.

4 (1h 8m 58s):
We were paid. And did you just leave that relationship? Like, okay, whatever, that's fine. No hard feelings.

2 (1h 9m 4s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 9m 5s):
Yeah. We were not stressed about,

2 (1h 9m 8s):
Because I thought that that was a bigger lose for them. And also to just seeing how things unfolded. I ha I wanted nothing to do with that situation, but I was happy. That's what con Kanye is gig. It was like, for me, once I saw how they operated within that, I'm really glad things just turned out the way, how they did. It's the best possible case scenario.

4 (1h 9m 33s):
Did that change the way you think about working with a big brand?

2 (1h 9m 37s):
Yeah. Completely taught us so much.

3 (1h 9m 39s):
We also no longer needed to. Right. The whole reason why we collaborate changed because of our material position. Like we're not looking for that check, actually. We're looking to develop a product that somebody is better at making or that would take us two years to do so.

4 (1h 9m 58s):
So when, so, so essentially it was like a blessing in disguise.

2 (1h 10m 3s):
Yeah. I mean like everything I think that has happened to us has been not case, you know,

4 (1h 10m 8s):
I mean, cause 2020 was a catastrophe for the fashion industry, but, and I'm sure this is not easy or fun for you to say, but it was a record year for tougher for your brand.

2 (1h 10m 18s):
Yeah. And I'm, I'm proud of that. And I'm proud that we exited the fashion industry. That's why

4 (1h 10m 24s):
The fashion industry, that is how exited the fascia

2 (1h 10m 26s):
System system. I would say

3 (1h 10m 28s):
It was a plan was like, we need to get out of here. It's just like,

2 (1h 10m 33s):
It's not safe. It's not safe. It's just also not in your best interests. My interests are to make really cool things, get them to people that want them and continue to do this throughout my life and continue to make my own money and not give my money to someone else that didn't help me do this.

4 (1h 10m 52s):
So instead of being in a, instead of being in a system that where you are totally at the mercy of distributors and retailers and the fashion press, et cetera, you said forget about all of that. Let's not even be involved with saying engage with that. Let's just do our own thing. We will, we will, we will make the bricks. We will build the building. We will own the land. We will sell the,

2 (1h 11m 17s):
And also take our time to do it because the fashion industry and poses this really strange time where you're supposed to be successful with no one, it's just like, no, one's even seeing this.

3 (1h 11m 26s):
We're producing by design, right. To collections like, you know, 400 items every six

4 (1h 11m 33s):
Months, right. And wasteful,

3 (1h 11m 35s):
Absolutely wasteful. And you end up when you have to make like that. That's why you are selling a pair of jeans for a thousand dollars is because you didn't figure out the supply chain at all for that. Right. It takes a year to figure that out.

4 (1h 11m 51s):
One of the really interesting things that you did was, and I don't mean this in a pejorative way, so I hope it doesn't come out that way, but you kind of used the, the ins the sort of the machinery of the fashion industry to build yourself up to a certain level. And once you were able to make the choice to completely reject it and move away and start your own thing. And that may have been that $400,000 grant in 2017, that kind of helped you to jump started. You were able to do it, right? Because you had, you kind of got to the point as far as you could get with the fashion industry. And you knew that in order to, to, to grow and to thrive, you had to leave it.

4 (1h 12m 33s):
Is that, is that a fair interpretation?

3 (1h 12m 37s):
Absolutely. That was the approach is how do we get out of this

4 (1h 12m 42s):
Tough R I'm curious. I mean, you came to New York is a 17 year old selling t-shirts that you recreated on Mulberry street, right. And your handbags are worn by some of the most famous people on the planet. Some of the most influential tastemakers, when you see them holding your bag with your logo on it, I don't know. Do you think my God, that's just this whole,

2 (1h 13m 15s):
It makes me smile. It makes me a smile. I'm really, really, really happy about that part of it, you know, because that's how I meant it to be. That's in my view. That's what I think is successful. Like when I turned my head three times when I leave my house and I see one each time I turn my head and it's a different person, that's like, oh yeah, cool. I'm smiling constantly. You know? Cause it's literally like a reminder that I did something in culture that is fab is like, you literally did that. You changed how someone dressed. And that's the only thing that I wanted to do.

3 (1h 13m 48s):
I mean, we appreciate, you know, the well-known people who buy the bag, but that wasn't our trajectory. Like they bought the bag afterwards, which is great, but we always joke, like they saw their assistant had it,

2 (1h 14m 0s):
You know, it's like, damn my system looks good. What's that bag that they have. It's like, you know, like it's like,

4 (1h 14m 6s):
But let's talk about what you want to be in 10 years from now because what, what do you think this brand will be? It will be handbags. There will be clothing that people wear. What else? I mean, tell me what's your vision.

2 (1h 14m 22s):
Definitely. I do. I already do have a 360 brand. I want it to be accessible. Like you can go to a store and get the things that you want to get know,

4 (1h 14m 32s):
And it's going to be a Telfair store. That's how far our store. And what's going to be in that store.

2 (1h 14m 37s):
Definitely clothes, definitely accessories and definitely

4 (1h 14m 41s):
Handles home. Like housewares, things like that. I mean, it's interesting because in fashion there are very few intergenerational iconic brands. Like I think of converse is a, is, was an example, converse high tops or Wayfair sunglasses, but it's very hard to produce an intergenerational brand in fashion

3 (1h 15m 10s):
Necessarily. Like that's what we love to see, you know, when it's like three generations in the same day.

2 (1h 15m 16s):
Yeah. It's like, your grandma has the bag and then your brother and then your mom, you know, I was like intergenerational multi-gender you're like multi yeah. Different economic status as it's like, love it so much.

4 (1h 15m 32s):
When you think about this journey, cause it's been a long time. You mean you, you started this brand 2005 tell far and have, you know, from most of it, most of its time until till very recently, we're working without massive recognition without, you know, the kind of awareness that you have now, how much of that do you think has to do with just how hard you worked and how much you put into it and how much do you think has to do with, with luck?

2 (1h 16m 5s):
I worked hard, you know, I've had to do some shit that other people would not, could not, should, not. That should not, you know, it's like, you don't need to ride bikes in the winter with your collection on your bike, in the snow to get it home. You know? Like it's like people wouldn't do certain things that I did to do this. I did it. And I'm proud of what I've done, you know, but I wouldn't, I got what I got out of. It definitely hard work pays off, but I wouldn't be like, oh yeah, you need to do that to be successful. I was like, there's lots of people that are successful doing, not that

3 (1h 16m 40s):
Don't let this be a lesson. Yeah.

2 (1h 16m 42s):
It's just what I had

4 (1h 16m 42s):
To do. How about you? Like

3 (1h 16m 45s):
No work versus luck. It wasn't work or luck because there's a lot of ways in which it was very specifically what we did and what we worked on that made it successful. And that those decisions seem to fly in the face of the pursuit of success. And it's not going to work for everybody. Right. But if we're talking specifically to somebody like us, then I would say that you can't be in a position where you're binding your success or your survival to your exploitation. And that's the position that we're put in, in the creative industries in general, like we need the platform, we need the budget, we need the distribution.

3 (1h 17m 31s):
And in order to change that situation, you literally have to change a situation. You have to change your environment, not just adapt to it all the time and you need community to do that. You need to do it with other people.

4 (1h 17m 44s):
What is the thing that most excites you about where your business is headed?

2 (1h 17m 50s):
The freedom of us being in charge of that and not being owned by anyone else that's gonna impose anything that we don't want to do on us.

3 (1h 17m 59s):
I mean, definitely that is the actual war process of that. It's enjoyable to do this now. And it doesn't feel like work or translation or gymnastics

2 (1h 18m 9s):
It's like, or you're going to get in trouble if you don't do this thing for someone else.

3 (1h 18m 14s):
And you know, we're trying to create a place where we can share this relationship that we have with our community, I guess, is the word for a conspiracy with other people. You know, I'd love to have a record label.

2 (1h 18m 29s):
Yeah. I mean, there's so many things that we want to do within like, just like our general relationships with our friends and collaborators that actually are benefiting them and they're getting their work heard and seen without censorship or anyone telling them, you know, they need to do something in order to do that.

3 (1h 18m 50s):
Yeah. The process, you know, we actually are doing what we want to do. And I feel like that that is the message. That's what people are responding to the underlying reality of the thing, not just the image.

4 (1h 19m 6s):
That's Baba grad boy, creative director of telephonic, along with the brand's founder, Telfair Clemens. And by the way, for last year's summer Olympics tell far sponsored the Liberian Olympic team and designed the uniforms, which you can see on the telephone, our website. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact us. Our email address is H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this in mind is at guy Roz and on Instagram or at how I built this NPR. And mine is at guide dot Roz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by rum team Hara bluey.

4 (1h 19m 50s):
It was edited by Neva grant with research help from para safari. Our audio engineer with Stu Rushfield. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Julia Carney, Elaine coats, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, and Alex Chuck. Our intern is Margaret Soreno. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.