1 (0s):
Hey everyone, before we start the show. I just want to let you know that we'll be back online this week with our how I built this resilient series over the past few months. I've been having live conversations with Business Leaders about how they've been coping during these tumultuous times. You can join us every Tuesday and Friday at noon Eastern 9 a.m. Pacific by visiting the how I built this Facebook page our Twitter account or on NPR's YouTube page and be sure to bring your questions for the guests and hope to see you there. R and one more really quick thing how I built this isn't just a podcast but it is also now a book A book filled with Incredible stories and lessons from some of the world's greatest entrepreneurs, you can pre-order the how I built this book right now, wherever you get your books or by visiting Kyra's.com now on to the show So over the past several very challenging months.

1 (58s):
Our team has worked really hard to bring you 14 brand new episodes in a row in addition to our how I built this resilience Series so over the July 4th holiday, we all took a little break which means that this week. We're running a repeat but this one is such an incredible episode. In fact, every time I think about Bobby Trussell and the story of Tempur-Pedic. I still cannot believe it happened. The way it happened and you'll see what I mean in just a few moments this episode first ran back in October of 2018.

2 (1m 32s):
Enjoy.

1 (1m 36s):
How did you raise the money to start this Venture at

2 (1m 40s):
all? Well, that's a really good question because I had to go back to all my basic same people who had invested with me in my other

1 (1m 51s):
horse Ventures that failed,

2 (1m 52s):
right? Yeah that had failed and gone broke. So I had to convince them that even though we lost money in something that I knew a lot about that we were going to make money in something that I do nothing about.

1 (2m 11s):
Ramen PR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Gyros and on today's show how Bobby Trussell made one of the most spectacular pivots ever from horse racing to memory foam and how we turn that gamble into one of the biggest mattress companies in the

2 (2m 35s):
world.

1 (2m 40s):
So even if you don't sleep on a TempurPedic mattress, you may have tested one out at the store or seen one of those commercials where the people are jumping up and down on the bed next to a glass of red wine that does not spill. Well either way. You probably know the Tempurpedic is one of these squishy mattresses that feels strangely firm and soft at the same time with this memory foam that molds itself to your body and today of course plenty of other mattresses and pillows have From but back when Bobby Trussell first launch Tempur-Pedic in the u.s. It was a completely new idea a new sensation now to be clear Bobby did not invent memory foam.

1 (3m 20s):
In fact when he discovered it on a trip to Sweden. He knew absolutely nothing about foam nothing about mattresses. He'd been making a living in an industry that couldn't be more different horse racing and horse breathing Yes. You heard that correctly the guy who brought Tempur-Pedic To America a two and a half billion dollar company today was a horse breeder. But as well here at the time he discovered memory foam. He was also shall we say desperately in need of a new gig?

2 (3m 52s):
And so what Bobby did was to see the

1 (3m 54s):
incredible potential in a new kind of mattress and then he basically gambled everything to launch it in the US. I beat Russell grew up in Milwaukee in the 1960s and was the oldest of seven kids. His dad worked in sales and his mom was a homemaker and Bobby worked odd jobs from the time. He was a kid paper routes and things like that. But when he was about 11 years old something happened that changed the course of his entire life

2 (4m 24s):
when my dad was I think early 40s he went on a vacation with my uncle and they rode some horses and he came back and he said I think I'm going to buy a riding horse across our 11 and any kid who hears that is totally music she was area. So I wrote with my dad between the ages of 11 and till I went to college. I was 18 pretty much every week. And horse racing became my favorite sport, huh? We would get issues of the Chicago Tribune and I would cut out the race results and keep them in a scrapbook and try and follow when that's when the same horse ran back.

2 (5m 6s):
So that was I was totally enthralled in

1 (5m 9s):
that Bobby eventually went to Marquette University. But horse racing was always in the back of his mind

2 (5m 16s):
pretty much. Yeah, I major in finance, but I would often be sitting in the back row of a lecture reading the racing form and I would get my Marquette buddies and we would get in the car and we would drive and 90 minutes south to Chicago and go to the races at Arlington or Hawthorne Racetrack and we would have a ball but I know several times we were so broke on the way back. We had to run the tolls. They didn't have the gates. They ask you just a few degrees, right? Hope I didn't catch

1 (5m 52s):
you and so after college you um, assuming you went to start working with with racehorses full-time,

2 (5m 58s):
right? Yes, the Thoroughbred to actually raised at the race tracks and that's where my interest was. So I wrote letters to the top ten horse trainers in the country and nine of them didn't answer and one of them was John nay rude and he are you D who offer me to job? ABS one at his farm in Ocala and the other one at the racetrack of Belmont

1 (6m 26s):
Park, which is in New York

2 (6m 28s):
right in New York and I had never been on a plane before so I went there with my bag showed up at the front gate and told them I had a job with Jon a rude showed him the letter and they said well, mr. Nehru still in Florida. He's not going to be here for two weeks. And I said, oh no and then he said well Assistant is here. He's got ten horses here. You can go see him. So I they put me in inside the track on the backstretch. They call it where the barns are. I went to meet the assistant trainer who was a Yugoslavian guy who spoke, you know, very broken English and I told him the story and he said you have a college degree boy and I said, yeah, he said what you doing here boy?

2 (7m 21s):
I said I want to work on the racetrack and he said you can stay a over the barn only one problem is we have the mattress frames came up from our Florida Division, but we don't have the actual mattresses yet. So I said okay, that's fine. So anyway, I slept on the springs for two weeks until the other horses in the mattresses

1 (7m 46s):
came up Lord and who would have thought 20 years later you would have been. Them a beautiful TempurPedic

2 (7m 52s):
mattress. Yeah. And in that

1 (7m 54s):
amazing get that back. We'll get there. We'll get that. Let's hold our horses. So this is the mitt this the mid-70s you start working at Belmont. And what was your job there?

2 (8m 4s):
Well, I started out as a hot Walker making $75 a week. What's a hot Walker a hot Walker is guy who walks Hots and Hots our horses that come from their morning workout and they're they're sweaty and hot and you need to walk them. Them in a circle for about 30 minutes and make sure and you water them off slowly. So you make sure that they don't drink too much water because that can make them sick. And then because what I wanted to do was be a groom a groom made a hundred twenty-five a week and they assigned you three horses that were totally yours to take care

1 (8m 41s):
of to brush and to clean and brush in

2 (8m 44s):
the clean their feet and to put bandages on them and feed them and take care of them.

1 (8m 50s):
She doing all that for the last But but what was the thing you really wanted to

2 (8m 54s):
do trainer? Yeah trainers what I wanted to do, right, but I did leave New York after two years and went to Chicago and my dad bought me a really really really slow racehorses for like 1,500 bucks. And so it got me my trainers license and I got in the game and ended up training. My first winter was at Keeneland. And where's Keeneland Keeneland is the racetrack in

1 (9m 24s):
Lexington in Kentucky in Kentucky, Lexington Kentucky bazoombas. We're like the great horses are trained.

2 (9m 31s):
It's the horse breeding capital of the world.

1 (9m 33s):
Right? Right. So this is like, I guess you're sort of hitting up against the early 80s, you're probably close to 30 years old at that time. But we were you married at that point. No, you're single guy single guy focused on

2 (9m 45s):
horses single-minded single guy.

1 (9m 49s):
Okay, so you're in Lexington, Kentucky and I I guess your career in horse racing really begin to take off of that point. Right

2 (9m 55s):
right. Yeah, I got a job at Gainesville a farm and I had studied pedigrees while I was on my racetrack adventure and became something of an expert and they needed that and that was the best move I ever made to my young life because I was soon involved in racing at a very high level instead of with a horse that my dad bought me for $1,500. We were buying Kentucky Derby. He favors for ten million dollars a month before

1 (10m 23s):
the race. Wait one horse for ten million

2 (10m 25s):
dollars. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And yeah that horse is his name is proud appeal and he eventually ran last in the derby, but it was quite an experience and we also had significant interests in in European racing. We were just as interested in who was going to win the English Derby or the French derby or the Irish Derby as we wore the Kentucky Derby because we were looking for stallion prospects. And so Spent a lot of time. I went over following horses that we had made major investments

1 (10m 55s):
in at what point because I guess it was some point you should have branched out of one on your own and started your own like horse lending or Insurance startup,

2 (11m 5s):
right that was in so I was at Gage way from 79 through 86 and then I decided to go out on my own with Jim Philpott. He was the general counsel the in-house counsel for gains way.

1 (11m 19s):
And basically you would like be advised. Saying trainers on like which horses to buy and sell things like that.

2 (11m 25s):
Absolutely. So we started stallion Management Services to do the same thing. We do the gains way, but do it remotely for Farms that couldn't afford to have that infrastructure. And then we also had a company called Thoroughbred Advisory Group which advise people on other horse related transactions and that was a very good idea, but very bad timing because the horse business started Go into

1 (11m 51s):
recession. This is in the in the late 80s.

2 (11m 56s):
This is in the late 80s. Yeah prices started going down and essentially everybody went broke including you including me. Like how broke did you go? Well, I was I felt like I was the brokest man in America because you know, I did get married when I was 34 in 1986 and so by this time fast-forwarding to 9. In 91, I had two little kids and we moved to a better location for kids than my downtown townhouse, but I couldn't sell the first house.

2 (12m 37s):
So I had two houses two kids two mortgages and

1 (12m 41s):
no job. Did you have to declare bankruptcy?

2 (12m 45s):
No, I never did. I would everybody in town. But everybody else. I want everybody to so everybody knew that. That suing isn't going Really helped and the big joke was if one guy could come up with $10,000. He could pay a million dollars in debt because person a would pay B&B with Pacey and we'll come all the way back around a person a

1 (13m 10s):
so how how badly in debt were you

2 (13m 13s):
I was probably a million dollars in debt. So how did you

1 (13m 16s):
pay your bills and your business goes bust you owe the bank to kids house. That you have a mortgage appear another house that you are living in. How do you what do you do?

2 (13m 28s):
Well, it wasn't easy because I would go to my office and my secretary would say Bobby. We haven't paid the rent in a couple months in the landlord was just found here and they're good. They're going to turn off the electricity and then I would go home and my wife would tell me the same thing, you know, the gas company called and so I really didn't know what to do. I would get in the mail. I would get pre-approved credit cards going you're

1 (13m 59s):
pre-approved for a 25 thousand dollar line of credit,

2 (14m 2s):
you know, and I would say you're really stupid but I would I would take them up on it because and we would charge groceries onto the credit card always figuring that you know, things were going to turn around but this was the period of my life where I fell back onto my roots my Catholic Education and Hi, it started going to Sunday mass with my wife when we got married. She really, you know, moving me up quite a bit. But you know, I was still kind of going through the motions. So I kind of rolled up my sleeves and went to church and started going to weekday masses and literally just prayed that God would show me what to do.

2 (14m 44s):
And I said it doesn't have to be in the horse business. You know, I just decided okay, if people come to me with ideas I'm just going to say yes. Yeah and my French horse trainer a landfill Lord. He called me and he said one day. I know a Swedish horse chiropractor who knew a company in Sweden that makes an air cleaner that can clean the horses

1 (15m 11s):
stalls. Oh look an air

2 (15m 12s):
purifier, right? It was a actually a negative ionizer with kind of zap. It was after the air and so my friend Alan said This Swedish horse chiropractor wants me to sell it in France. And he said I'll go you one better. I know someone will sell it for you in the states. So I started a company called nion. Okay, and it turned out to be the worst company because the product over there. It's 220 volts right here over here is 1 tensor product worked half as good here. Wait and figure

1 (15m 46s):
this out before you got them shipped over

2 (15m 49s):
no, no, no fortunately. All right. Good my my Market research was lacking and then the retail price was five hundred dollars for these and there were products on the market that were similar that were 4995 who can make the exact same

1 (16m 7s):
claims, right? You purify the air

2 (16m 10s):
right? Plus the company was owned by a guy in Sweden who's probably the only guy in Sweden who doesn't speak one word of

1 (16m 17s):
English. Wow, so could not communicate with them.

2 (16m 21s):
No, so he would send me. Faxes in Swedish and I would have to take them to University of Kentucky and get them translated and when I talked to him on the phone, I had to use an AT&T language line operator and each call cost me $300. Wow. So this was like the worst company with the worst product over 10 times the price of should be and so this was going nowhere fast, but I had to go to Paris in October of 91 because I had horses over there and I was still kind of in the business and the Swedish horse chiropractor said call me says baa-baa.

2 (17m 5s):
You have to come to Sweden while you're in Europe. I said why he said there's another company. It's a mattress vomit. You have to come see this mattress and his name was CG and I said CG. I don't want to hear about any more of your Swedish crazy Swedish. Connections but I still said okay. I'm in yes mode I went to Paris and I got on a plane and went to Stockholm and I met him and he introduced me to a guy by the name of Michael Magnuson and that changed my

1 (17m 36s):
life. Who's Michael Magnuson.

2 (17m 40s):
Michael magnussen is the guy he and his stepbrother goggle and Vic owned the manufacturing company, which developed the first Tempur-Pedic Addicts and he told me that they had just launched it in Sweden the previous month and that they wanted to go

1 (18m 2s):
worldwide with it last. What was it?

2 (18m 5s):
Well, it was a 3 inch overlay

1 (18m 8s):
like a 3 inch mattress pad. Yeah

2 (18m 11s):
exactly. It's temperature sensitive. So it distributes the pressure over a wider area. So it was break away. You could put your hand on it. It would make a handprint you take your hand off and it would slowly. Back to where it

1 (18m 24s):
was. Did you ask him about it? Like where did it come from? How did they invented? What what what is this thing? Yeah, it

2 (18m 32s):
was originally invented by NASA for the space program to cushion the astronauts from g-forces. And since it was a public thing the US government invention US Government there wasn't a patent on it was freely alienable and my Swedish friends bought a company in Denmark. Arc called Dan foam and they made it better and reproducible and more durable and the idea was

1 (19m 2s):
let's turn this into a mattress to sleep on was that their idea from the beginning?

2 (19m 6s):
No, that was the weird thing is they really didn't know what the head if they had this squishy squishy foam with slow come back and they had originally been interested in it for football helmets, but they made some three inch overlays and they put them in a In home in Copenhagen and they were thinking maybe it would be good for bed sores and the reports they got back is that it? Yes indeed it helped people who had vet sores. And the other thing they heard though. Anecdotally was hey the people who had back pain said it helped their back. And so that's when they said.

2 (19m 46s):
Hey looks like we got something here

1 (19m 48s):
like a mattress like for sleeping like, oh like a

2 (19m 51s):
mattress. That's when they Launched it in Sweden and that's when I met them.

1 (19m 56s):
Okay. See you're in Sweden. You mean with this guy Michael Magnuson? And as you said, he's looking to take this mattress foam worldwide. So so, how did like, what did you what did you do? How did you decide that you wanted

2 (20m 8s):
in? So I stayed at his house and slept on a mattress and I woke up and he said, well you think I said, this is the most amazing product I've ever encountered. I'm

1 (20m 17s):
interested

2 (20m 19s):
and I when I came home after my first Swedish trip I told Martha I said sweetie. We're in the mattress business.

1 (20m 28s):
And what did she say?

2 (20m 30s):
She said okay, but can you change the baby? I mean it is

1 (20m 36s):
remarkable, right you do this overnight your overnight at Michael's house and you sleep on this thing and you wake up and you're just thinking man. That was amazing. I want to sleep like this every single night. Yep, and and so right then and I said I want to work with you or you just said hey, this is kind of cool. Can we keep

2 (20m 53s):
talking? Well given my position in life. I was more forceful than that. I said, I'm interested. I want to get involved if there's any possible way and he said well we want Go worldwide with it. We have nobody in the states. So why don't you go back and write me a marketing plan and we'll see

1 (21m 15s):
and I said,

2 (21m 17s):
okay, so I did so I went home and wrote a marketing plan has some help with some old high school friends who eventually came on to work for us and we wrote which is perhaps the worst marketing. Lan

1 (21m 36s):
ever written and and what was your plan like we you said we're going to sell it here. We're going to distribute their like, what did you what was your pitch to them?

2 (21m 43s):
We said we're going to sell this in truck stops, huh? Because because well, it's only 3 inches thick. We thought it would fit great into the back of the cabs of the

1 (21m 54s):
semis. All right, because they sleep in like that that sort of elevated part of the cab right truck drivers to yeah. We thought it would

2 (22m 1s):
go perfect in there. Yeah, and we were also going to put an ad in The chiropractor directory. So anyway, that was it and he came over Michael came over in late 91 and we met them in Milwaukee and he and I negotiated that he would give me exclusive North American distribution rights for his products in exchange for in exchange for two things. Number one. I had to finance it because he said we don't have money to finance you you have to raise your own money. Any how much did you have to raise? Well, it was undefined but I was supposed to raise what is needed. So I raised about $500,000.

2 (22m 43s):
Wow. The other condition was we had to sell 10,000 mattresses

1 (22m 46s):
the first year in order to

2 (22m 47s):
maintain exclusivity. Yeah, and so I said sure, you know, I can do both those two things. Let me just let me just interrupt this for a

1 (22m 55s):
sec Bobby and I'll forgive me for this but I'm just I'm just trying to get into the head of Michael Magnuson. He is a Swedish die who is starting a Trust Company in Sweden and in he seeing some success and he agrees to give you a horse trainer a guy whose entire life as in the horse business, right the exclusive distribution rights to sell memory foam in the US. Why would he ever have taken a risk like that? Like what it's just seemed so implausible.

2 (23m 27s):
That's really a good question. But I had spent three days with him and the horse. Her and we had hit it off on a horse level because he was in the horse business in Sweden. Okay, and so he was like my Swedish alter-ego. He was like

1 (23m 45s):
Swedish spirit animal,

2 (23m 46s):
right? Yeah, and so he got comfortable with me as a person. I guess. Wow, and number two he wanted to control it. He didn't want to have some company in the u.s. That is going to have their own ideas. He had a certain Idea in his head of how he wanted this to play out and he knew he figured any way that he could control me which he could in. So we had a collaboration. We work together talk to him every day for 12 years basically and he didn't

1 (24m 20s):
even do any due diligence like you could have been a you know, you could have has an Axe Murderer like he didn't really know much about you like you could have been, you know a horrible person like he just took this

2 (24m 32s):
chance he took a chance but His Ace in the Hole was that I had to sell 10,000 mattresses the first year right of it to maintain

1 (24m 40s):
exclusivity. How did you raise the money to start this Venture at all?

2 (24m 45s):
Well, that's another really good question because now I had to go back to all my basic same people who had invested with me in these yearling Partnerships where you raced in Europe and my other horse

1 (24m 58s):
Ventures mailed, right? I had failed and gone broke. So I

2 (25m 2s):
had to convince them that even though we lost money and Thing that I knew a lot about that we were going to make money in something that I do nothing about

1 (25m 11s):
like it when you what was your

2 (25m 12s):
pitch then they said hey guys, I know this horse thing didn't work out but I'm getting it

1 (25m 16s):
into mattresses or memory foam and and I need your money and did any of them say are you out of your

2 (25m 21s):
mind? Well, my dad, you know, he gave me 50 Grand or something and my mom did too and they just did it because

1 (25m 30s):
I love you. You're the sun

2 (25m 31s):
sure, right but the rest of them, I think they did. It because a they were comfortable with me but be when they encountered the product they had the same emotional reaction that I did when I first encountered it and this would include the first guy who invested Dave fog. Oh, I had met only a few months earlier told him the whole story. He said we'll bring me over the product. So I brought an overlay over to his house. He was January and it was freezing and one of the unique properties. Is of the material is that it freezes as solid as a board at 50 degrees Fahrenheit. That's the temperature sensitivity sold the The Mattress froze on the way over to Dave's house.

2 (26m 17s):
And so I come in carrying this overlay and I noticed a luckily that he had a fire going in the fireplace. So I said let's just I'll just set this over here

1 (26m 28s):
for for for a while and we can chat and

2 (26m 32s):
he said okay, and so we talked about it and I'm kind of eyeing the mattress to see if it looks like it's uncurling. So anyway, it did thought out and he really liked it and he wrote me a check. So I think that's the answer to the question the product kept bailing us out. Michael Magnuson came over. I told him I'm going to raise the money, but can you help me so sure so he came over we met him in Chicago and we went over to my Uncle Bill's house and we showed him the mattress. I told him the story he could see that you know, Michael was really wasn't some you know, fictitious guy because Uncle Bill had lost a lot of money in my yearly in

1 (27m 14s):
Partnership. So Uncle Bill,

2 (27m 18s):
he goes into the back room. He comes out 10 minutes later. It has me a check for $50,000. So I am just absolutely Overjoyed. I said, thank you so much Michael and I left I dropped Michael off at O'Hare he went back to To Stockholm I got in my car and drove back to Lexington and on the way home. I stopped at a fast food restaurant. So the next morning was Saturday morning and I get a call. I'm dead asleep. It's 9:30 and his Uncle Bill and he said he calls me Rob and he says Rob I

1 (27m 56s):
got a phone call from

2 (27m 59s):
Connie at a Burger King in Lebanon in Indiana. Who said she found.

1 (28m 4s):
To check for $50,000 on the floor

2 (28m 9s):
and I said there's no possible way. So I'm going through my pants pockets and my code and I said, oh my gosh, and I thought Uncle Bill was going to say, you know, maybe my money is not so safe with you after all and then he said can I overnight you another

1 (28m 25s):
check how

2 (28m 26s):
bottle and I said I said, okay. Okay. Yeah.

1 (28m 30s):
Thanks. Wow, Uncle Bill. God bless him. All right, so So you are now get some money you got that. You gotta sell 10,000 of these overlay mattresses. How did you do we were supposed to sell 10,000

2 (28m 45s):
mattress in the first year and we sold 70 so we missed the goal by 9930.

1 (28m 56s):
When we come back in just a moment help Bobby Trestle managed to keep his company alive after selling just 70 mattresses. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First to boost with Facebook's summer of support. It's six weeks of free digital training classes interviews with business experts and presentations from renowned entrepreneurs all to help businesses.

1 (29m 37s):
Get back to business get more creative with your marketing discover how to embrace e-commerce learn how to build an online business and more hear from experts like Magic Johnson. Shark Tank's Kevin O'Leary and Yuna world's CEO Monique Nelson join them at FB.com summer of support. Thanks. Also to Squarespace take your great idea and build a website with professionally designed templates visit squarespace.com and use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

1 (30m 18s):
Comedian Nicole Byer doesn't consider herself body positive. She just accepts herself as is I hate that there's a name for like not hating a part of who you are. Do you know what I'm saying? Like, it's insane Nicole Byer on her new book very fat. Very brave and How To Love Yourself Listen to It's been a minute from

2 (30m 37s):
NPR.

1 (30m 41s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the early 1990s and Bobby Trussell has gone all-in on a business. He knows next to nothing about memory foam mattress pads and he's shipping them over to the u.s. In containers from Europe and he's come up with a marketing plan that mostly targets chiropractors, but things are not going well and the $500,000 he raised from friends and family. He burns through it. Just a few months

2 (31m 11s):
where we're spending the money on well product, you know, the the containers were 75 grand apiece. We bought two or three and we had salary I wasn't taking a salary but I had two or three people working for me and we were just had a burn rate.

1 (31m 28s):
And so when you were out of cash is how did you continue operating?

2 (31m 34s):
Well, we had a container coming over it with $75,000 and I called Mike. And I said we have a problem. He said what's that? I said the container coming next Tuesday. I can't pay for and he said oh, okay. Let me call you back tomorrow and talk to Doc his

1 (31m 54s):
partner and brother. So the next day he calls back and says

2 (31m 57s):
okay, here's what we'll do. We will

1 (31m 58s):
swap that container for 10% interest

2 (32m 2s):
in your company Tempur-Pedic and I said, okay because I was in no position. We weren't going to make the 10,000 dollar minimum and I was out of money and he could easily have just pulled the plug on us and said, okay. Sorry didn't work. We're going different way, but he said I'll swap that for 10% interest in your company. And I said

1 (32m 24s):
great. I mean you got into that position because the mattress pads weren't selling so so why weren't they? Well, the

2 (32m 32s):
chiropractors who we were trying to Market these overlays through couldn't cellular malaise. They Say Bob gets a pad. I said no, it's a mattress and these would say what do you do with it? I said you put it on top of your old

1 (32m 46s):
mattress. They said it's a pad and and how much were they? How much do they

2 (32m 50s):
cost? We're like $800 for Queen so they weren't cheap. They weren't still weren't cheap, but the chiropractor's kept saying you want to make a pillow of the

1 (32m 60s):
stuff because that was more in their comfort

2 (33m 2s):
zone selling pillows. They stole those anyway, and so they helped me design a pillow. I'm with Dan foam and they came out with a pillow probably right around then right around July of 1992. So then I said okay now we got another product and I

1 (33m 21s):
asked the chiropractors we were working with

2 (33m 24s):
how would you go about selling it if it were you and they say well it's really a unique product you need to get in people's hands and I said well gee there's 40,000 chiropractors in the u.s. We don't have any rep for sword. The bution, how am I going to get it in the hands of all these chiropractors and I asked one of them and I said what if I just mailed them one and the guy says well, I guess it could work. So we mailed 500 pillows to 500 unsuspecting chiropractors.

1 (33m 57s):
You just found their names and like a chiropractor directory. Yeah, and the pill you just sent them a package with a Tempurpedic pillow. And what did it say? It's a here you go. Here's a here's a pillow for

2 (34m 6s):
free. Yep. You have the letter on top of the pillow. It's a big box. And it said this is the Tempurpedic Swedish neck pillow. It's you know, the best thing since sliced bread yada yada yada. It's yours free if you order for and if you don't like it, all we ask is you let us pick it up at our expense. So we got twenty-five percent of them two by four pills. And that was the major breakthrough that turned us out of the nose dive and so all of a sudden from that

1 (34m 37s):
500 car.

2 (34m 39s):
Crackers we had a hundred twenty five of them who were buying for pills a month and we were

1 (34m 44s):
selling it to the chiropractor's for $49.

2 (34m 47s):
So we did about $300,000 in sales that first year all in the last four months of the year pretty much. Wow, and I always will have a fond place in my heart for chiropractors because they really got us going in we eventually sold or have 10,000 chiropractors, which I believe you still do now selling the products in their

1 (35m 8s):
practice, but Of course, you know turning this business into a into a business that just distributed their chiropractors was not it was not going to be enough. That was not how you were gonna blow this thing open,

2 (35m 19s):
right? And we always wanted of course to get it in stores and in November of 92 course not we're still broke. I got no salary and we were went up to Cincinnati to the mall up there and I do some Christmas shopping. In which is really more like Christmas browsing, you know, I'm bored to tears and my wife Martha said bring your pillow and you can find a store that will sell

1 (35m 50s):
it even like go walk like walk through the mall and find a store that would sell your pillow. Right? So we're walking through the

2 (35m 56s):
mall and she said, oh there's Brookstone. They sell pillows go show them your pillow I said, okay, so I went there and show the some, you know, 18 year old kid the pillow and he's He didn't know anything and he said well I can give you the number of headquarters in New Hampshire. I said, oh, that's great. So he gave me the number of headquarters and I call them the next week. I got into to the purchasing department and he said oh you need to talk to Steve Rich. So I left a message for Steve rich and I sent him a pillow too. And so I would call Steve every day for weeks and weeks and weeks and leave them a message and finally I don't know two months later.

2 (36m 41s):
My secretary comes in and says Bobby. There's a Steve Rich from Brookstone online too. And I said I think I'll take that and he's calling me to tell him to stop calling him because he had a note on his desk every day. Bob trestle table drop table trouble Tempur-Pedic and I said, okay, but all I ask is one thing make sure you took that pillow out of the box. Because you can't tell by looking at it. Hey, so yeah, it's very nice. But we sell seven pillows and we don't need anymore and yours is would have to sell for a lot more than our other seven pillows.

2 (37m 22s):
I said, okay, so we hang up 10 minutes later. The secretary comes in. Is that Steve rich and Brookstone again, and he said, you know, maybe we'll take this down to research after all and he had not taken it out of the box and when he did at my I made them. Thomas he had the same reaction the emotional reaction with the slow come back foam. So taking it down to research men showing his wife and his wife's his wife slept on it. And she said this is the best thing I've seen so then he calls me back the next week and he says, okay. You got me on your side. Now. I have to pitch it to the

1 (37m 60s):
purchasing board

2 (38m 2s):
and then he calls me back. Okay, the we're going to buy 500 pillows. Wow, we've got Other stores we're going to buy for for each store and you got to give me a hundred demos and I said, okay and I hung up the phone and talk about high five. And that was the that was the seminal moment. We had never sold anywhere near 500 pillows and within two weeks. We were the hottest selling new product in

1 (38m 31s):
Brooksville. And if Brookstone was already selling a bunch of pillows. This was probably Far and Away more expensive than the other ones. Right?

2 (38m 41s):
Right. He said we're going to have to sell this Bobby. We have to sell this at $90 and I said really because the chiropractors is selling it for more like 70 and he said yeah because it's just to make the numbers work I said, okay, whatever you want to do. So they sold it for 90 bucks and it would absolutely started selling like hotcakes. Do

1 (39m 2s):
you think the It was so expensive was there was like a de cachet that like some people would go to a Brookstone and say I'm $90 pillow man. That must be amazing. I'm gonna buy that

2 (39m 13s):
the answer is yes,

1 (39m 14s):
right.

2 (39m 16s):
I think if you sold it for 30, he'd sell less. Yeah, and that is what Michael Magnuson wanted. That's why he chose me is because his vision was this was not a product that would be discounted and he was afraid any other. Company would discount it and it would become just like everybody else. We have something no one else has so why should you discount its high-end and it it actually performs I would get letters from strangers saying Bobby you money. I've had a sore neck for 30 years and now it's gone. That's when I knew we were really onto something when I got these letters and that's what Michael that was.

2 (39m 59s):
His vision is how to position the product as high-end

1 (40m 2s):
as you want to sort of Pause and reflect on this for a moment you were I mean you and Michael had only known each other for a couple of days when he agreed to give you this contract but over the you know over the course of time as your business really started to grow and you had to run this together was her tension or did you actually continue to get along great. There was a lot of

2 (40m 23s):
tension and stress and we got along great. I mean he was very exacting and he had his own ideas. Has of how to market and sometimes I didn't agree and we would kind of have it out. So there were some stormy days but we trusted each other and one thing I learned about him is if you do what you say you're going to do no matter how it turns out you're going to be all right and the same with me and him he would always do what he said he was going to do so, we have a very close working relationship. And yeah, it was difficult. We had a Of ups and

1 (41m 4s):
downs. Yeah, so they had they owned a significant chunk of the company your investors own a significant chunk of the company. How much were you able to

2 (41m 12s):
retain? Well that 10% interest that they swapped for that container of pillows. We had to do that for more time. So they ended up owning 45 percent of my company. So me and my us investors, we owned 55 and what was your what was your

1 (41m 30s):
Revenue in the in like 97 idea what? Are you doing in 2030 million a year? Some like that? My goal was

2 (41m 37s):
always to get to a hundred million that seemed like it took us forever. But we did 300 thousand and ninety two than 2.6 million and six and a half the Thirteen and twenty eight and forty five

1 (41m 50s):
and mainly mainly from pillows initially

2 (41m 53s):
right initially, but the mattresses came in about 1994 because what we were able to do is Customize the products for the US market in other words. We took that 3 inch overlay and we laminated it to a five inch base of normal high density foam. So now we had an 8 inch foam mattress, which almost double the price. So now we're selling a queen for like 1299 or $13.99. But now we had something that could appeal to the US

1 (42m 28s):
market. So essentially was a mattress like what we think of as a thick mattress you were able to to create that and then start to sell it in the US right kind of people find out about them. How do they know about them again through crack

2 (42m 40s):
chiropractors? No, the chiropractor's never did really get going with the mattresses. They were kind of pillow pillow people but we started selling in a store chain called Relax The Back who had like 30 or 40 stores started in Texas. And when we first started marketing it we marketed the mattress as hey if you have

1 (43m 3s):
Pain, you got to have this mattress

2 (43m 6s):
similarly to the analogy. I use is Volvo when they started if you were number one concern is safety. You got to have

1 (43m 14s):
this car. Right? Exactly.

2 (43m 16s):
We had this medical endorsement. We had 10,000 chiropractors selling it. Of course, they had another 15,000 chiropractor selling it all over Europe. And so that was our core and we use that as a springboard. And so okay. We're in Brookstone. We're going great guns. And I told Mike Anthony the CEO Brookstone that I wanted to sell one of them to sell the mattresses. Also now that we had the Americans style mattress thickness, and he said Bob our stores are tiny. We can't fit mattresses in there. We're immense gift shop and I said, okay, so I started selling to Sharper Image their archrival Brookstone had an absolute cow about that and they call Mike Anthony called me and he said by we want you to not to sell to sharper images.

2 (44m 8s):
It's going to hurt our business and I said, okay, I'll pull out a Sharper Image if you sell the mattress to and he said man, okay, so how so he put a twin size mattress in the by this time. They've got 200 stores and they were selling one mattress per store every six weeks and I was waiting for the call from him. Him to say Bobby we

1 (44m 35s):
tried. Yeah,

2 (44m 37s):
but he never I never got that call because then it was one every five weeks and then six months later was one every four or three weeks and ended up being like to a week as the product got more and more momentum, huh? And the reason it got more momentum is cause parallel to this we had an opened up another Channel called the direct response Channel. And that's the other huge moment when we were able to figure out how to sell direct to the public. Yeah, so I started advertising in the New Yorker magazine at first and my main goal was to get our name out there.

2 (45m 18s):
And so we were started selling in the Wall Street Journal and USA Today and then one day I got a

1 (45m 24s):
phone call from the New Yorker our first to magazine and he said, you

2 (45m 28s):
know you guys have an 800 number. That means you You're

1 (45m 33s):
eligible for a direct response rates. No. Okay. How much is that? He said 6,000 I said I've been paying twenty five thousand and I could be paying six thousand and he

2 (45m 46s):
said yep that changed my world because now I could advertise almost indiscriminately. I could be everywhere and it was at this time that Brookstone was selling trying to sell mattresses and people became Gradually more and more aware and they would walk into the store and say that's the one I read about in the USA Today. And so that's what got us going with

1 (46m 14s):
mattresses. Okay. So let's get a sense of the landscape of mattresses in the US like at that time, like who dominated the mattress market and the US and presumably Tempur-Pedic wasn't even like a drop in that ocean,

2 (46m 29s):
right? It was dominated by the 4S. Has see Lee Simmons sirte and spring are at the time and they all were inner Springs and they didn't even try to differentiate as a product. It was a commodity and they sold on pricing terms, you know, it's 50% off and he never have to pay that's how they they sold it. So we came along with our message in our magazine ads same. Hey, we have something

1 (47m 2s):
It's a better wheel. So, okay, so you have this this growing business and you know, you went from two million to 6 million to 14 million. First of all at what point were you making real money. Is it as the CEO of the company

2 (47m 16s):
as far as my making money personally, I never was able to pay much of a salary because we weren't making any money until we merged in 2000

1 (47m 29s):
the the merger in 2000 was basically like all of the subsidiaries that were selling Tempur-Pedic around the world. They basically became one big company. Right?

2 (47m 39s):
Right because from our standpoint, we just had a a distributor agreement with the Swedish

1 (47m 46s):
guys. All right, and the day that they canceled

2 (47m 49s):
that agreement would be very sad day because we'd be out of business

1 (47m 53s):
essentially they could have they could have at any point just gone directly to Brookstone and said you are exclusive

2 (47m 59s):
distributor what we do have a contract but Well that first year they sure could have been probably the second 30 years to but then we probably were hitting the but it's still the contract with the Swedish company. What have they challenged it? I mean it was very flimsy. But what I didn't realize is from their standpoint, they had the same problem. We were 60 to 65% of their world sales. So their company was only valuable pretty much because of that contract so we both were very highly motivated. Debated to merge the problem was how do you value? Sure? Yeah, because they had the manufacturing plant and they had the IP and during the 90s.

2 (48m 44s):
I couldn't draw much of a salary but I did do is sell little bits and pieces of equity to friends. Yeah and family and stuff. So I was able to keep going based upon selling it down. So very many people I talked to who have startups will say, oh, I'm never going to sell controlling interest. I got it. Rolling. Well, my philosophy is the opposite is I'd rather have five percent of something really big than 51% of something small. Yeah, and so my advice is he? Okay, you'd always like to control it, but you don't have to

1 (49m 22s):
so, okay. So you merge you end up with, you know, a certain percentage probably, you know, five or about 5% Yeah, something like that. Yeah, and you are the the CEO of this merged company

2 (49m 35s):
and I

1 (49m 36s):
guess like in early the early 2000s you guys took outside investment. You took a big chunk of money from a private Equity Firm right

2 (49m 45s):
right to private Equity companies came in and bought it and week. We retained our are 20% for our us

1 (49m 54s):
group. I think they put in like 350 million dollars or something and in 2002, is that

2 (49m 59s):
right? Well, there was a Early 2000s after we emerged my Swedish friends decided that they wanted to sell a partial interest because they needed it for their other companies. This is only one of their ten or fifteen foam companies. Yeah, but the investors were slightly worried about having a minority interest with a private Swedish company that they don't really know that much about and so sweet came back and they said well, we don't want to be T so we'll sell the whole thing. So anyway, that's what the 350 million was. The purpose of the transaction was to take the swedes out.

2 (50m 41s):
Yeah, not a ton of it went into the company actually.

1 (50m 45s):
So in 2003, this is no longer a Swedish

2 (50m 49s):
company. Yeah, 2002 actually 2002 and

1 (50m 52s):
so you're not calling you're not calling Michael every day anymore.

2 (50m 56s):
Well, they stayed on as a consultant for Michael did as the for a couple years and but not as much know. certainly not and my boss is now was the board which was to private Equity companies

1 (51m 9s):
how did you deal with that that you'd like that

2 (51m 12s):
was a lot different because they're thing was they wanted to buy into companies that they were already growing already profitable and they were comfortable with managing they didn't want to run it so they pretty much let me do my thing there was an equity kicker involved that we hit sir certain numbers we would get another 50 million which they didn't really think we'd hit the we blew the doors off and we hit it quite easily the next year yeah it turned out to be one of the all-time great private Equity deals for them and then it took us public three months later so it was like they'd even have their money up for a year and they may like

1 (51m 54s):
10x so did you sell all of your ownership as well and ideal

2 (52m 1s):
no ice Little and I did get a little bit of a Payday but I got more options. And so now I'm now this horse guy. I'm CEO of a public company on the New York Stock Exchange. We're on ringing the bell there when we went public and so this is just to me the total answer to a prayer times a hundred. So

1 (52m 27s):
you are saying you're the CEO of this public company you are. But with still look what percentage of the of the market did Tempur-Pedic a control when you took the company public we were

2 (52m 41s):
probably then about, you

1 (52m 46s):
know, five six percent

2 (52m 49s):
of the u.s. Mattress Market, but we were a much larger percentage of the $2,000 and up price point because I shouldn't we should

1 (52m 59s):
point out here Tempur-Pedic mattresses are very expensive. compared to ordinary mattresses

2 (53m 5s):
right right we are definitely in the high-end you know luxury whatever you want to call it we are able to operate exclusively there because the product is just so good it really is a breakthrough in sleep science it adapts to your weight and your shape and your temperature and so your mattress is adapting to you instead of forcing you to adapt to it what we always would say is you know inner spring pushes up against you or as this breaks away from you so you can see that we have a better product and that's why we're able to charge

1 (53m 41s):
more yeah so okay so so Bobby I remember there was a certain point in my younger days when I bought a memory foam mattress I didn't buy Tempur-Pedic I couldn't afford it I just bought one at Ikea and it seemed like there was a point and you know sort of the around 2006 2007 what everyone got into this game because clearly You they the other mattress companies just let you guys dominate the sector until they realized they can step in and take away

2 (54m 11s):
some of your market share, right all those years back in the early. I mean late 90s and early 2000s. I was expecting to get a call from a from an industry player like

1 (54m 23s):
Sealy to say. Hey, we want to buy you out or

2 (54m 25s):
something. Yeah, and we would have said okay, but I never got the call because I believe that they thought that we would go the way of the water bed at this was a fad and that was one of the the main concerns of the investors is this real or is it a fad and we were able to convince them that it's real and convince the public markets that is real because it is

1 (54m 53s):
you you step down I guess in 2006 as the CEO of the company. Would you just feel like you know what been there done that? And I want to kind of enjoy life a little bit and not work so

2 (55m 6s):
hard that was part of it. And the other thing was I never really saw myself as a CEO of a public company talking to investors and and there's guys who can do this better than me is what I knew from from the start and II feel like I had been in long enough it kind of wanted to cash in my chips and and do something

1 (55m 26s):
different. Yeah the thing that's quite amazing about your story is that your entire identity Bobby was about horses from the time you were a kid like you loved horses you rode them you read the horse trades you read the horse racing you know newspaper section you you went to college intending to get be a trainer you went and did this until you were 40 this was your entire life your whole identity was around horses and then you completely switched I mean you went to something that you had no natural interest in you just like the product

2 (56m 2s):
right II changed horses in the middle of the stream he might say yeah and I was in a situation where all that I knew had kind of dried up and gone away horses and when you're 40 years old and your resume says horse it's not like you can go get a job at a bank yeah or an insurance company you really have to consider doing something entrepreneurial which you were probably well equipped for because I think you're more you're more equipped for that when you're 40 then when you're 20 yeah you have to have the ability though in the mindset to take risks but when you don't have anything it's not so risky if you think about it then the other thing is I think it's important to have the propensity to think big and so I always kind of had that you know my feeling is you just got to keep trying gotta keep saying yes and you got to keep praying and things will break

1 (57m 5s):
I asked this question of everyone who comes onto the show and it is a simple question Bobby which is how much of your success it is because of your intelligence and your skill and how much because of just luck

2 (57m 20s):
well I think a lot of its luck I think it's the combination of perseverance you know I'm going to Pat myself on the back it's for I kept trying I mean different things you know I had the ionizer business in the horses and you know I'm definitely not smarter than other people I think I'm a risk taker and I got very fortuitously matched up with a product that was significantly better than what was out there and it was something that no one else had yeah so I think perseverance combined with luck is what got us where we wanted to be B

1 (58m 5s):
that's Bobby Trussell co-founder of Tempur-Pedic by the way back in 2012 Tempur-Pedic acquired its longtime Rivals Sealy mattresses making it the biggest wedding provider in the world Bobby Trussell still sits on the board and today the company has a market cap of the three and a half billion dollars I'm just gonna be frank with you for a moment if you are a child like between you know three and seven Tempur-Pedic mattresses suck because you can't bounce on them it shows if you're a kid you're like oh you got the Tempurpedic here the wine glass does even spill over I can jump on this thing yeah they're better for sleeping And thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

1 (58m 57s):
You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to tweet at us, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produced this week by runned abdul-fattah with music composed by rum Tina or Blues. Thanks also as a Kansas limbed Eric Gales, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this. this is NPR there are only five months to go until election day and every week or even every few hours there's a new twist that could affect who will win the White House to keep up with the latest tune into the NPR politics podcast every day to find out what happened and what it means for the election