0 (1s):
Hey Prime members You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon. Music Download the app today.

1 (9s):
Think of all the things you can do in 10 minutes or less. Scroll through social media. check your bank balance, make a sandwich, or learn about the surprising economics behind all these things. The Indicator from Plan of Money is a quick hit of insight into the economics of business, work, and everyday life. Every weekday in less than 10 minutes. Listen now to The Indicator podcast from npr.

0 (30s):
As an entrepreneur, you don't just create things and make content. You embody a lifestyle. Shouldn't your website embody it too? Well, a life URL is a polished and personalized place for your business. A life domain is unique and memorable. Just like what you're building, life gives you a URL with a point of view as strong as your own. And name.com makes it simple to find the right domain and connect it to your favorite products. Own a web address that's as inspiring as your content. Get a life. Learn more at name.com/life and use promo code built 25 for 25% off the first year of your life domain.

0 (1m 15s):
Build your success story at Babson College. Join a community of problem solvers at the school. Ranked number one in entrepreneurship for 30 years by US News and World Report. Babson's action-oriented hands-on learning approach helps you find opportunity in every challenge and develop critical thinking and communication skills so you can lead, innovate, and inspire in the business world. Graduates from Babson go on to take the next big leap in their careers, whether it's successfully launching their own venture, earning a promotion, or landing their dream job and making an impact. These graduates become a part of your network ready to support you on every step of your path.

0 (1m 56s):
Babson is where your entrepreneurial leadership journey begins. Get started at babson.edu/success. Hey, before we start the show, a question for you. Let's say you post something on social media and you get lots of great comments and reviews, but there's one, just one that's negative or rubs you the wrong way. Do you ignore it or does it stick with you? Kind of not you. Well, I recently talked with actor Nathan Lane, who had a story just like this where one sentence in an article about him really got on his nerves and what happened next, change the entire trajectory of his acting career. You can hear my conversation with Nathan Lane on my other podcast. It's called The Great Creators.

0 (2m 38s):
Just search for the great creators with Guy Raz wherever you listen to podcasts. Or go to the great creators.com and now onto today's show. Hey, everyone. So last year to mark the 10th anniversary of her beauty brand, The Lip Bar Melissa Butler hung a billboard in her hometown of Detroit and it said, Shark Tank told me to quit 10 years and 2 million units sold. Thanks Mr. Wonderful. We shared Melissa's amazing story a few years back, including that disastrous appearance on Shark Tank So. in case you missed it, or even if you heard it, we think you will love it.

0 (3m 19s):
Enjoy.

4 (3m 24s):
When people came to my house, like it was literally a lab, like I definitely didn't have an apartment, you know, I ruined stoves, I've lost security deposits. People would come over my house and want ice, and I have no ice because my, my freezer's filled with lipstick molds. I'm like, oh, if you want ice, you're barking up the wrong tree. I don't have ice, I have lipstick.

0 (3m 49s):
Welcome to How I Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Melissa Butler launched a lipstick brand at her kitchen stove and got it into hundreds of target stores, all the while challenging and industry to change the way it thinks about color and beauty. There are some industries that are really hard to break into. If you're looking to start a business, for example, a car company, just think how hard that would be, aside from lots of experience and engineering know-how.

0 (4m 32s):
You'd need an insane amount of money just to get it off the ground, which is why you don't see that many new car companies every year. Now, one day it may very well be possible that someone will figure out how to make cars in a really cheap and cost-efficient way that could allow lots more entrepreneurs to enter that category, which is essentially what happened to the cosmetics industry in the past two decades. It used to be that getting into cosmetics required a lot of experience, a network of connections and lots of money. But today, the barriers to entry are much lower. There are dozens of white label manufacturers all over the world that will happily make your product for a relatively small price.

0 (5m 19s):
And it's meant that there's been an explosion of new cosmetics brands over the past decade, which makes sense because the global beauty industry is worth half $8 trillion. Lipstick alone, it's a 9 billion global market. I mean, there is a lot of money in beauty. And so to stand out brands really have to be about more than just the products, which is exactly how Melissa Butler thought about her brand. The Lip Bar, when she started making her own lipstick in her apartment, she knew she wanted something that not only challenged the idea of what beauty is, but how we define who it's meant to apply to.

0 (6m 1s):
Melissa wanted to make lipsticks that were bold and brash and vivid in colors that at the time weren't widely available. Blacks and golds and purples and bright neon pinks, shades and colors that were expressive and strong and confident, and most importantly, made for a whole category of women who weren't being served by the market, which happened to be Melissa's cohort, black and brown women who didn't feel like there was a makeup brand made with them in mind. The story of how Melissa turned her kitchen stove project into a cosmetics brand that's now in hundreds of target stores across the country includes a cross-country promotional tour in a retrofitted airport shuttle bus, a disastrous appearance on Shark Tank and a decision to move the business from New York to her hometown of Detroit, where she grew up with her sister and her mom in the 1990s.

4 (7m 1s):
My mom was a crane operator, which is really crazy to say right now because I'm 34 and I've never ever met anyone else that was a crane operator. But basically she worked at a steel factory, you know, Detroit is automotive, so she was at a steel company that created steel and, and parts for the automotive industry.

0 (7m 22s):
And so she would leave for work in the morning with a hard hat.

4 (7m 25s):
Steel boots. Yeah, definitely steel toe boots that I would sometimes put on, and they were heav as hell that I would put on and like kind of wobble around the house with. And so she would go to work at 11:00 PM and and come home in the morning. And so I, I used to look at it as a disadvantage that I was raised in a one parent household because you know, everyone needs their dad and everyone needs both parents. You need that, that nature and that nurture. You need that protector and that provider. You need your mom to be soft, or at least that's what I used to think. And as I've gotten older, I realize that it's probably one of my biggest advantages because watching my mom do something and work in an industry that is so male dominated, I think it was only her and her best friend.

4 (8m 15s):
They were the only two women in that entire steel factory. She saw that, that she had to live life for her and that no one was coming to save her. So she taught us very early that we had to save ourselves. So it was like she directionally ingrained this pathway for both me and my sister.

0 (8m 35s):
Was your mom, was she pretty strict?

4 (8m 38s):
No, my mom wasn't strict at all. Like my mom was working. She was working, yeah, all the time. I could have been a very wild kid, but I wasn't like, I didn't sneak boys into the house. Like I remember growing up in like, you know, those curious teenage years where you're, you may be interested in like drinking or Maybe, you wanna smoke pot for the first time, or even like sex. Like I, I wasn't interested in any of it and I, I've never been a person to like study. I wouldn't, I would never say that I was a good student, but I always got good grades.

0 (9m 11s):
I don't, I don't know Detroit super well. I've only been there briefly a couple times. Tell me about your neighborhood. Was it, I mean, your mom, I'm assuming was it like, was a union, was a union job and probably had a, a pretty solidly middle class income and, and health insurance and those kinds of things that came with a job. What was your neighborhood like?

4 (9m 30s):
Guy? My neighborhood was horrible actually. And I'm from like one of the most dangerous neighborhoods in Detroit, but I never felt unsafe and, and even though we didn't have a lot, I never needed anything. So like in high school, for instance, I was, I was one of the quote unquote cool girls like who had like the designer clothes, but that was really my mom doing her best to, to provide for her, for us what she felt like would satisfy us. And, and now when I talked to her, I remember maybe a year ago I was like, mom, we were living way beyond our means. And she's like, yeah, but I I did it for you.

4 (10m 11s):
Yeah. And I'm like, that was irresponsible. And, and we, we kind of laugh about it now, but she was like, I just wanted you to be happy and I wanted to, to be able to provide for you the life that, that I felt like you deserved.

0 (10m 26s):
Okay. So you, you did well at school. You, you got good grades and, and I guess you were able to test into this pretty competitive public high school in Detroit called Cas Tech, right?

4 (10m 38s):
Yeah, it's, it's right near downtown and it's, it's essentially a college prep school and it was probably 98% black students. Now it's a little bit more diverse because the city of Detroit is changing. So right now there's a lot more investment in the city, whereas, you know, 15 years ago, no one was downtown Detroit. Yeah. So when I went to ca Tech, it was surrounded by, by people who were either homeless or drug addicts. So it's like this amazing school that's in the midst of all the blight. So Detroit went through a really tough time and it hasn't been until maybe the last, you know, 10 years that it's, it's experienced this renaissance.

0 (11m 23s):
Do you remember as a like, as a high school kid thinking, I, I'm gonna get outta this place. Like I am going to leave this place and I'm gonna make money and I'm going to do something really interesting with my life. Like, do you remember having those thoughts?

4 (11m 41s):
I don't, I don't, I don't think that I thought about, I, I never thought that I needed to leave Detroit. Even with me living in a not so nice neighborhood, I didn't think that there was anything wrong with it.

0 (11m 57s):
Hmm. But I mean, soon after you graduated, you, you would wind up leaving Detroit. I I, in fact, I mean you left Michigan, right?

4 (12m 6s):
Yeah. And I was like, well, if I'm gonna go to college, I'm gonna go away. And most of my really good friends actually stayed in Michigan, but I knew that I wanted to go to a, to a H B C U. Yeah. That was a given. I knew that I wanted to be around black people and so I didn't want to go to what we call a P W I, which is a predominantly white institution. I knew that I didn't wanna go to Michigan State or, or Michigan because I wanted to have some pride and, and really have the black experience.

0 (12m 38s):
Right. So I guess you start off at Alabama State, which is in Montgomery, Alabama, but but then you decided to transfer to to Florida To Florida a and m in Tallahassee.

4 (12m 48s):
Yeah. And they were both two really great HBCUs and they both had really good business programs. Like I knew that I wanted to get into business because in high school I used to work at my cousin's clothing shop. So my cousin is my first exposure to entrepreneurship. Hmm. Like he had a store in the mall and he taught me everything about margin and pricing your product and hiring people. And he also gave me a lot of independence. And now that I say that, I think that was the theme of my childhood. Yeah. Having independence and, and being given this room to be a free thinker and come up with, with the answer for yourself.

4 (13m 28s):
Because I'll never forget, it was probably Christmas Eve and he allowed me to count all of the money that we made that day and it was the most money I had ever seen. It was insane. And I think I counted maybe like $12,000 and I was just like, oh my god, he's rich. Yeah. And my entire goal for going to college wasn't necessarily because I wanted to get a higher education. I didn't really care about it that much, but I went to college because I was like, this is How, I can make money.

0 (14m 1s):
Hmm. So, so what was your plan? Like what, how were you gonna do that?

4 (14m 5s):
So literally I switched my concentration and my focus to business finance and that's where I stayed. And I was like, okay, well if I'm gonna do this finance thing, I'm gonna go work on Wall Street because you know, now I can be the Wolf of Wall Street again. Being, being influenced by, by pop culture. Yeah. So like I didn't know anything about it. Like, again, my mom was a crane operator and I had a cousin who was an entrepreneur, but I didn't know that there were so many different paths to make money. Yeah.

0 (14m 35s):
Okay. So you, you wanted to get in into finance, but, but before you graduated, I read that you actually spent some time in China like, like in Beijing Yes. Learning Mandarin

4 (14m 44s):
For six months. Yeah. Oh

0 (14m 46s):
Wow.

4 (14m 46s):
Wow. And I had just been really fascinated with China and this idea that China was about to be the next superpower. And I was like, that would make me valuable if I wanted to learn about business. You know, if I'm this business girl, I should go to China and learn a little bit about their business. Yeah. But it was a complete culture shock. I mean, I think I was sharing that literally my and my entire life was black. Yeah. Like I came from black Detroit, you know, I went to a black, all-black high school Yeah. In Detroit. I went to a black college and now here I am the only black woman and I'm in the middle of Beijing. It was, it was so odd. And I think they were also shocked, you know, people would come up to me and, and touch my skin and everyone automatically assumed that I was, you know, from an African country be because if you had black skin then you were automatically from Africa.

4 (15m 39s):
From from Africa, yeah. And if you were from America, then you were blonde hair and white the eyes. Right.

0 (15m 44s):
I mean, how would you like, assess the whole experience? Was it, it

4 (15m 47s):
Was life changing.

0 (15m 49s):
Yeah.

4 (15m 49s):
Oh my God, it was life changing. Like I understood like how big and small the world was. Hmm. I understood how a woman from Detroit could have such synergy and connection with a woman from Iceland. Like one of my really good friends who I met there, she was from Iceland. And like she was my best friend when I was in the program sort of thing. And we would just talk about a lot of the same things even though we had a completely different life. And I think for the first time in my life I understood that we were all human and it wasn't just black, white, Asian, it was just humans.

0 (16m 28s):
Hmm. Wow. So you come back to the US and you decided to go work on Wall Street for Barclays Bank. And when you got to New York, what, what was that like? Was it exhilarating? Were you just like, were you just kind of blown away by it? Or were you sort of, was it un unnerving to be in this kind of corporate environment? What, what was your, what's your memory of starting out at Barclays as an analyst,

4 (16m 53s):
I thought, and I still think that New York is the most magical city on the Planet. Hmm. I was awestruck and, and I started very quickly meeting other people who like worked at JP Morgan Chase or worked at Goldman Sachs and, and it was like a, a whole world. But I remember, you know, my first week being really excited and like expressing that I wanted to learn and like, I wanted to learn as much as possible and I wanted to, to, to be good. And like one of my managers was like, get over it kid. They give shit bonuses. And I was like, wait, what? I didn't know what that that really meant. I didn't know what a good bonus was, what a bad bonus was. I just knew that he was unhappy and a lot of my team members weren't, were unhappy.

4 (17m 37s):
So I think very quickly, like I learned that I wasn't gonna learn that much. But then also that if I stayed there, that I would be in this environment where no one likes their job. And like, from my perspective, I'm like, hell, I just got all these student loans I had wrapped up like $50,000. You

0 (17m 57s):
Gotta pay them back.

4 (17m 58s):
But also, like, I didn't do all that. I didn't go to college and get these student loans and, and go to China for six months to be in a career that I hate. And then from what you're telling me isn't necessarily even a, a career path that's, that's desirable anymore. So I was disheartened, if I'm gonna be honest, it was mostly white men and you know, they would ask me questions about my hair cause I would, as a black woman, like one of your superpowers is that you get to change your hair all the time and do whatever you wanna do. And I was constantly like asked about either my hair or my clothes or if something happened in the media with a black person. And this is oftentimes the, the plight of a black person working in corporate America.

4 (18m 39s):
You're never able to be an individual. Yeah. Like, so every day I had to answer for the entire black race and, and it was exhausting. Oh, working at Barclays was exhausting.

0 (18m 49s):
Fair enough. I mean, it sounds like the most boring job on the Planet. Let's be honest. It is finally just sounds so boring. I mean, I know you make up tons of money if you stick with it, but my God,

4 (18m 58s):
Yes. It's not fun.

0 (18m 59s):
So you're doing this, you're clearly, this is not like what you wanna devote your life to, but you need the job, you need the money and you're kind of working and earning your paycheck. But I guess on the side you were kind of just looking for different creative outlets and, and, and I read that one of them was making soap.

4 (19m 17s):
Yeah. So I had gotten really into this soap that was sold at Whole Foods. It was so expensive. My mom thought that I was crazy cuz I tried to call her like, mom, I found this soap, it was so cool. And she's like, what is it? I'm like, well first of all, it's expensive. It's like $6 a bar. And she's like $6 soap. I grew up where my mom would buy like, you know, the, the six pack or eight pack of like dove or dial and that whole thing was $6. She's like, you're buying one bar of soap for $6. She's like, I don't wanna know about it. So I'm buying these expensive soaps and as a hobby, because also I, I'm now listening to my mom like, wow, I am spending a lot of money on soap. And I'm like, well if this soap is so great because it's natural and it's handmade, then why can't I make it?

4 (20m 2s):
So I first started making soap for my own personal use.

0 (20m 7s):
Hmm. How did you, and by the way, how you were just like, going online and, and looking up like how to make soap?

4 (20m 12s):
Yeah, there were, there were tons of like forums. I took a soap making class, I'm buying all sorts of ingredients. I'm on YouTube learning how to make soap. I'm like reading books on soap making like, I'm, I'm literally going in. It's, it's insane.

0 (20m 26s):
How do you, and by the way, and what did you learn about how to make a bar of soap? Like, like I'm assuming there's like gly, maybe glycerin or vegetable oil or like, I don't know what Yeah, what what would you buy to and like, I dunno, melt it down on like your up stove on your stove top, like in a pot and then melt it. Yeah. Ba

4 (20m 45s):
Basically in a pot with a Pyrex, like a double boiler.

0 (20m 48s):
Yeah. Oh right, okay. Yeah,

4 (20m 49s):
You could, you could make soap with glycerin, which was more moisturizing. Yeah. But I didn't think that it, it cleansed you as well. So the old fashioned way of making soap, and this is the way that I typically made them, was with Lie. Oh yeah. Which is dangerous and it can burn you and

0 (21m 7s):
Bo Right. I definitely

4 (21m 7s):
Got Burn. Yes. Yeah. Yes. And, and you had to handle it very carefully. And then soap goes through a curing process so it could take, you know, three months for your, your Soap to Cure or you can put it in the oven to cure that soap. Wow. And then I came up with this idea cuz I was, I was really getting into like the creative component of making the soap. So I was thinking like, okay, well what are all the different flavors that I can make? Like I was making a strawberry bar and I put like dried strawberry in it. And I was like, I don't think that's really clean or sanitary. Cuz also I'm not a chemist and I don't really know what I'm doing. And so when I'm coming up with these outlandish ideas, I don't have anyone to say like, Hey, that's actually not good for pH balance or this is going to like, cause bacteria and mold to build.

4 (21m 54s):
So I'm trying all these different soap recipes and I'm trying to make it look all cool and you know, have a gradient with the soap bar, like creating ombre soap bars. Like, I spent so much time making soap and honestly so much money

0 (22m 8s):
By the way, I I, I have to confess it sometimes when I'm at Whole Foods and I'm by that soap area, you know, where they've got like those beautiful translucent bars of soap, like with things like flowers or whatever, suspended in the soap. I kind of wanna, it looks delicious. Like part of me wants to just take a big bite out of it sometimes. Just be

4 (22m 28s):
Honest. They're beautiful and, and oftentimes they are all natural and I mean, it's not gonna taste good, but it won't kill you.

0 (22m 33s):
Right. I mean, cuz like we did Lush on the show. We, we did the whole episode on Lush and, and that stuff looks is beautiful too. Like the, you know, the sliced, you know, loaf of soap that you can

4 (22m 44s):
Eat. So here's the thing I was obsessed with, with Lush and Lush is really like, I actually don't think I've had this full circle moment, but, and in my soap making, I was like, I wanna be lush. And I think that's what made me say like, I wanna start a soap business actually, because I was obsessed. Hmm. Like, this is it. I, this is, this is my way out. I'm gonna create a company that's gonna be called the Soap Bar.

0 (23m 9s):
I love it. Very creative soap bar. I'm surprised that that name didn't exist, that it wasn't taken.

4 (23m 15s):
Nope, it didn't exist. And the concept was that all of the soaps would be named after drinks. Right. So I would have a margarita bar that was like lemon and lime basically. Yeah. With sea salt on top. So I had all these really fun ideas and all these grand plans and, and ultimately one day I was calling a supplier and I was looking for, you know, more pigments for my soaps cuz I was trying to get really funky and fancy with my colors.

0 (23m 41s):
Yeah. Well Obra colors are, yeah. I mean that's very challenging. Yeah.

4 (23m 46s):
Yeah. It takes a little work it takes, takes some time.

0 (23m 48s):
Braid design. Yes.

4 (23m 51s):
And he's like, wait, slow down, slow down. Do you want Lip gloss pigments or do you want soap pigments? Huh. And I was like, Lip lipstick. I knew nothing about lipstick, but I couldn't believe that I could buy lipstick pigments. And that was it for me.

0 (24m 6s):
Wait, you just call the supplier to ask for more pigments and they're like lipstick or soap and you're like, wait lipstick.

4 (24m 13s):
Yeah. And it was a split second. It, it was so crazy because I paused. Yeah. Knowing good and well I was like looking for soap pigments. It was almost something that I felt like, like I shouldn't have been doing. Like I shouldn't have access to it. So when he said lipstick, I'm like, I can make lipstick. Oh, I'm done with this soap business.

0 (24m 35s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Melissa spends down all of her savings to launch a lipstick business. And why after she's flat broke, she goes one step further and quits her day job. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

NetSuite (24m 57s):
Today's episode is sponsored by NetSuite. NetSuite gives you the visibility and control you need to make better decisions faster. And for the first time in NetSuite's 22 years as the number one cloud financial system, you can defer payments of a full NetSuite implementation for six months. That's no payment and no interest for six months. And you can take advantage of the special financing offer Today, 33,000 companies have already upgraded to NetSuite, gaining visibility and control over their financials, inventory, hr, e-commerce, and more. If you've been sizing NetSuite up to make the switch, then you know this deal is unprecedented. No interest, no payments. Take advantage of this special financing offer at netsuite.com/built. That's netsuite.com/built. To get the visibility and control you need to weather any storm netsuite.com/built.

Microsoft Clarity (26m 2s):
This episode is brought to you in part by Microsoft Clarity to build a successful product. The biggest advice I give to product teams is to know your users by seeing how users truly experience your product. You can identify product opportunities and prioritize changes that matter. Microsoft Clarity makes all of this possible with simple yet powerful features. Watch session replays to discover what works with users and where they struggle. View heat maps to see where there's engagement and what content gets ignored. Pinpoint what's really bothering users with frustration metrics like rage, clicks, dead clicks and more. You'll be blown away by how simple and easy clarity is to use. So stop guessing, get clarity. Oh yeah. Did I mention it's completely free and works across apps and websites. Check out clarity@clarity.microsoft.com. One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. It's usually just at the top of the app and it's totally free.

4 (27m 14s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This from npr. I'm Guy Raz. So it's right around 2010. And Melissa had just had one of those life-changing phone calls with a supplier who asked just kind of randomly if she was looking to buy products to make soap or lipstick.

0 (27m 32s):
and in that moment she decided lipstick for one thing, lipstick was actually one of the few kinds of makeup she wore

4 (27m 41s):
At the time. I think that I was into reds, oranges and purples.

0 (27m 48s):
Oh yeah.

4 (27m 48s):
Yeah. And and part of it, like, part of the reason why when we launched The Lip Bar we had such crazy colors is because I remember it being so difficult to find purple lipstick. Hmm. Like, I wanted purple so bad, but it's like only a couple brands salt purple at the time. And it was hard to find and it was wasn't in stock. And I'm like, why is it so difficult for me to like have this bit of self-expression?

0 (28m 14s):
And then I'm trying to think about like, well what's the next step? Like then you're gonna get a a box of just powder pigment powder for lipstick, but how do you make lipstick? Like what, where do you, where do I go to learn about how to make a lipstick? Did you, did you like go online and type in lipstick recipes?

4 (28m 33s):
Yeah, pretty much. I, I probably Google how to make lipstick and there wasn't that much out there at the time, but I just started experimenting and I probably made, I don't know, a thousand batches of lipstick. None of them worked before I found one that was like it. Hmm.

0 (28m 50s):
First of all, what do you melt together to just get the, you know, the, the base for lipstick?

4 (28m 57s):
Well this is the way I've, I've explained it like all lipstick is basically the same. It has its same like core ingredients. All of it has a wax, all of it has an oil and all of it has a pigment right now, depending on the waxes, depending on the oils and the other additions, that's going to impact the amount of color that's gonna impact the texture. If it's soft, if it's creamy, if it's moisturizing, if it's long lasting. Now all of those other things are optional.

0 (29m 25s):
Right. And then depending on the proportions, like that's gonna affect the texture. Like when you apply it to your lips, how that is sort of spread onto the surface of your skin. Right. Like a thinner coat or a thicker coat, things like that.

4 (29m 40s):
Yeah. So if you have too much oil, it's gonna be soft and it's gonna feel luxurious on your lips. Hmm. But that lipstick probably is gonna break. Huh. If you have too much wax, then it's not gonna spread on her lips in a nice silky and and creamy way. If you don't have enough pigment then you can have this beautiful color. Like the actual lipstick could be a bright pink. Yeah. But when you actually put it on your Lip, no color shows up. So it has to be a really delicate balance of pigment, oil and wax.

0 (30m 12s):
It's like a really luxurious and expensive crayon.

4 (30m 15s):
That's exactly what it is.

0 (30m 17s):
And when you had all the ingredients and you started to like melt stuff together, what did you pour it in? Are there like, I mean, can you just go online and get like lipstick molds?

4 (30m 27s):
Yes and no. So most companies, like the huge companies, the L'Oreals of the world, they pretty much had a monopoly on the molds market. So there was, from my understanding, and this is in 2012, there were only a couple of suppliers in the US who made molds. Hmm. And the biggest one was Cavalla. And I was able to buy maybe four used molds. And trust me, they were not cheap. I think I've spent like a whole paycheck on them.

0 (30m 57s):
Like thousands of dollars.

4 (30m 59s):
Yeah. The molds were maybe $1,500 a piece.

0 (31m 3s):
What are they made out of? Like

4 (31m 4s):
Metal, steel. So they were also very heavy. I bet. So yeah, I probably bought maybe six or $8,000 in molds and How I bought them and How I had access to them is, I found a lab that was going out of business. And I think they were in Louisiana and this guy was selling them and I found them on Craigslist. I think,

0 (31m 26s):
I'm trying to imagine you in your apartment, like after working on the weekends, melting down all this stuff and experimenting with different colors and pouring it carefully into the mold and probably getting like lipstick material all over your kitchen stressing out. Yeah.

4 (31m 42s):
It ruins grout. Like there have been so many times where I've ruined stoves, I've lost security deposits. When people came to my house, like it was literally a lab. Like I definitely didn't have an apartment. Yeah. I had a lab and so, you know, the whole table would be spread out with all of my different ingredients that I kept in these airtight jars. And after I made, like let's say I melted down this perfect lipstick and I poured it into the mold, I really wanted it to the lipstick to cure. So I would put it in the freezer so people would come over my house and want ice. And I have no ice because my, my freezer's filled with lipstick molds. I'm like, oh, if you want ice, you're barking up the wrong tree.

4 (32m 22s):
I don't have ice, I have lipstick.

0 (32m 25s):
So you and you were presumably working like 60 hour weeks at Barclays?

4 (32m 31s):
Oh yeah, absolutely. And I was so committed, I, I started looking for suppliers in China for packaging. Right. I started, like, I would come home, I would maybe get home at, you know, seven, 8:00 PM and then I would stay up until three 30. Wow. You know, working on the recipe, I have no idea. How I functioned and then I would get back up at seven and go to work.

0 (32m 52s):
And did you tell anybody about it? Were you like talking to friends, like I'm making lipstick andm just really excited about this thing?

4 (32m 59s):
Oh, absolutely. They were all my first customers. Like every single time I made a product, like I never wanted to drink my own Kool-Aid. So I would invite people over to try on the product. Like people I met at work, anyone who would try it, honestly, I remember taking lipstick to work actually like, Hey, I made this, can you try it out? And people were like, no, is it gonna break me out? You made it. No, I don't does it? How do you know it works? And I'm like, I don't, that's why I want you to try it out.

0 (33m 29s):
We don't test on animals just on, just on Barclays and Blades.

4 (33m 31s):
Just on humans. Yeah.

0 (33m 32s):
Yeah. We test on finance people. So. And you're kind of experimenting and teaching yourself again and again. And at what point did you land on a recipe that you thought Yep. Because you said there's oil, there's wax and there's color. Right. And so those are basic ingredients, but you wanna get a certain type of wax and a certain type of oil and a certain type of color Right. To that speaks to you. So when did you know that you found that right formula?

4 (34m 2s):
Yeah, I mean my parameters for me were, they were just crystal clear. I was like, it needs to be vegan. I don't want any animal products or any animal byproducts and I want to be as natural as possible without compromising the color. So I knew that I wanted to create wild and crazy colors. Things that you really didn't see on the market at that time. And I wanted to feel good, so what's something that feels really good and creamy? And I was like, Shea butter, I, I'm gonna put shea butter on a lipstick. And and that was, that was it. Like I just started then looking for ways to source shea butter or coconut oil. And I think I tried a ton of different natural ingredients to add to, you know, that baseline formulation.

4 (34m 44s):
But really, you know, I found out that it was working when people started saying like, Hey, can I get a little bit more of that? Hmm. And that was it.

0 (34m 52s):
And did any of your like colleagues or were colleagues or friends, were they assuming that this was something that you might like sell at a farmer's market on a weekend? Or like, was that what they assumed? Were they even asking you what you were gonna do with this?

4 (35m 5s):
I think I made it very clear that it was gonna be a website. Hmm. And I don't think anyone took me serious until I got a shipment of our packaging. And here I am with 30 boxes, 30 boxes. Like they're on the couch, they're on the floor, they're everywhere. And here I am just kind of waiting like you remember that company? I said I was gonna start. Yeah. It's in my living room. And, and I think that's when they took me seriously. So

0 (35m 30s):
You were presumably making the sticks in your kitchen and then you were putting them into the,

4 (35m 36s):
The container into the lipstick tubes. The tubes. Okay. Into the lipstick tubes.

0 (35m 39s):
And you found a factory in China to, to make that packaging?

4 (35m 43s):
I did. And the, the inspiration behind the packaging, because our packaging really stands out, it's really cool. It's intricately designed and the inspiration was a bird cage. Like I love, like the old school Victorian bird cages that are just like super intricate. I don't like the idea of birds in cages. No. But I You don't like that. Yeah. I love the beautiful craftsmanship. And so I was like, I want it to kind of look like that. I want, I want something that doesn't look like a traditional tube because I'm building a nontraditional company. And I had been asking a lot of friends like, you know, what do you think about makeup? And, and oftentimes, especially for black women, what I found was they felt like beauty wasn't for them.

0 (36m 25s):
That it was made for not for their skin or their complexion. Yeah,

4 (36m 28s):
Absolutely. That it wasn't for their complexion. That marketing didn't cater to them. Yeah. Unless they were, you know, putting something in a brown bottle and then they're like, Hey, this is for black people. Right. So here I am friends with a lot of people who are now, for the first time in their lives they have disposable income, you know, cuz we were all fresh out of college basically. And, and making a, a pretty solid salary. And I was just like, there's a huge gap in terms of like what my generation wants and what's readily available in the market.

0 (37m 4s):
I mean, you look at your website today and clearly your products and your brand, they're designed for, for every kind of person, every skin tone, every racial and ethnic background and group. When you were initially coming up with the idea, were you saying, you know, to to your friends who you were kind of asking for feedback. Were you, were you sort of saying, look, no one is is serving us, you know, we are consumers and we spend a lot of money on fashion and beauty and we don't feel like products are being made for us and so I want to make products for us. Was that, was that how you thought about it initially?

4 (37m 43s):
Yeah, I think the goal was to create a brand where black women could be the default. So we create products, like you said, for every single skin tone. But when we first launched in 2012, I was just like, I don't want black and brown women to feel like they have to fit in to The, Lip Bar. I want them to know that they are The Lip Bar and they're not the default anywhere else. And my brand is gonna be where that starts.

0 (38m 17s):
Okay. So you come up with a really cool packaging design that, that looks kinda like a, a bird cage and you've got this factory in China that can make the boxes. Do you remember how many packages? Like, like lipstick dispensers you had to order?

4 (38m 33s):
Yeah, I think the minimum order quantity was 12,000 units. Wow.

0 (38m 37s):
So you had 12,000 units, like it stack up boxes in your kitchen. Yeah. And you had to pack each one by hand. You had to take the Lip, the actual lipstick and pack it in

4 (38m 45s):
Every single one. So I hand poured it into the mold and our, my mold held, I wanna say one Hil 48 units and one hill, 72 units. So this is

0 (38m 56s):
Gonna take a while to do. This can take a couple weeks.

4 (38m 58s):
Oh, this, this, yeah, this is, this is serious. But I think I launched with 12 Shades and the goal would be to sell all of this in a year. Yeah.

0 (39m 9s):
And, and but the soap bar, you were gonna name each soap like the margarita or the Lime Ricky or the Gin and Tonic. Were you gonna do that with the lipsticks too?

4 (39m 18s):
I did. And so we have Cosmo, you know, that was one of our, our colors and gin and tonic is still one of our colors actually. But we had things like fuzzy navel and all these like crazy names, Sour, Apple Martini. It was literally a green lipstick, fuzzy navel I think was like a light orange, like coral lipstick. And because it had that bar tie in, my concept was that whenever you bought a lipstick, you a actually also got a recipe card for that drink.

0 (39m 50s):
By the way, do you remember, I mean you must have, I'm assuming you got 12,000 these tubes right? Of the packaging for the lipstick. You had to spend a lot of your money on this. Was any part of you nervous about doing that?

4 (40m 8s):
I spent not even just like a lot of money. I think I spent all of my money guys. Yeah. I spent my entire savings because the thing that I didn't take into consideration was you buy it, but then you also have to get it here. So I, I learned a whole new skillset about like ocean freight and like diffs and tariffs and taxes and all that jazz. So I think buying the, the units and then actually getting them to my Brooklyn apartment may have cost me $13,000.

0 (40m 40s):
I mean,

4 (40m 41s):
That's cash. And then on top of that cash, I have to buy all the ingredients. I'm planning a launch party, I have to have pictures taken. So the startup cost for the business was probably around $30,000.

0 (40m 55s):
A And so as you were getting ready to launch, this is still pretty much you doing everything. I mean, were were you turning to to friends for help at all?

4 (41m 6s):
Yeah, my friends ended up being my, my founding team because I didn't know anything. I didn't know any better. So Roscoe, who's our creative director, she moved to New York. Like she moved to New York three weeks before we launched. And you know, some of my other friends in finance, I'm like, can you do our sales? Can you do our branding? Can you do, like, I had a team of six people. None of us were making any money.

0 (41m 29s):
And Roscoe was, Roscoe was somebody you knew from, from high school. She was a friend from high high school.

4 (41m 34s):
Yep. Roscoe had been one of my really good friends from high school. We both went, went to cast together.

0 (41m 40s):
And you basically said, Hey, Rosco, I think her last name is Spears, right?

4 (41m 43s):
So she wanted to start a career in fashion. So New York was attractive to her anyway. And all of my friends, they just kind of were like, what's, what's the Raz? I told them. And then they were like, okay, cool. And so now here we are, we're we have a business. And so I remember at our launch party, the very first person who showed up, we weren't even finished setting up yet. She came like 30 minutes early. It was a beauty editor from Teen Vogue. And I think we were all stunned, like, wait, people care. Hmm. People are listening. And so it, it was a really fun event and we got a lot of people to come, which was really interesting because we didn't really have a big budget and we didn't really know anyone and New York City and, and we had gotten the attention of, of some beauty editors.

4 (42m 31s):
So that was super cool and we were so proud

0 (42m 34s):
At a certain point you, you were going to have to make the decision of whether to quit your job. Now, I should make the caveat here that you were, one of the biggest advantages I think you had was that you were young.

4 (42m 48s):
Yeah.

0 (42m 48s):
That if it didn't work out, you know, you could maybe go back to to finance or something like that. But, but it sounds like you kind of just got to a point where you're like, yep, I'm ready. I'm gonna quit my job and do this. And I I think it happened like in 2013 were were you nervous at all about, about quitting your, this job in finance?

4 (43m 11s):
No, I wasn't nervous. I, I think you're absolutely right. I think one of the like magical things about being a first time founder, especially in an industry that you don't know anything about, you're completely naive and, and you think that everything is gonna work. Like I didn't have a plan, but I knew that it was gonna work somehow. And our first year in business, we launched in 2012, I think we made $26,000. Right.

0 (43m 39s):
And and that was mostly from friends and family who would Yes,

4 (43m 42s):
Absolutely. But that $26,000, even though it's not a ton of money, I was so proud to make that $26,000. Yeah. I couldn't believe it. I was like, wait, what? I think, I think my job on at Berkeley's, you know, I think I had been making likes $70,000 or something at that time. And so like to make, you know, essentially a quarter of my salary, I was like, this, this is a thing.

0 (44m 9s):
Yeah. Alright, so you quit Barclays. Yeah. And does anybody in your, I mean your mom, like, you know, she had to work really hard to, you know, to make a living to support you. And then you go off to college and I'm sure so many people are so proud of you. And you had relatives in Detroit who were like, oh my gosh, he's in sh if I'm your mom, I'm like, my daughter's at Barclays.

4 (44m 35s):
Absolutely.

0 (44m 35s):
She's working at on Wall Street, you know? Absolutely. I'm so proud. And then you call me and you say, mom, I'm quitting. I'm starting a lipstick company. What did, what did people in your family say,

4 (44m 48s):
Oh, they thought I was crazy. My mom, she was like, what? And then I remember her literally explicitly saying, who's gonna pay your bills? And I was like, well, I'm gonna pay my bills. I think I saved up. I, I tried to save up what I thought would be a year's worth of my expenses. I ran out in like six months. But my, my family thought I was crazy when I quit. And my feeling was just like, look, I am more comfortable with the idea of failure than I am with regret. And, and that's what made me say I can do it.

0 (45m 26s):
And now you are the c e o of The. Lip Bar. You have, I'm assuming you have no money, right? There's no, how are youre

4 (45m 37s):
Financing?

0 (45m 37s):
We're bro. Yeah. How are you financing this business?

4 (45m 40s):
Oh my goodness. We're we're literally dead broke. Me and Roscoe ended up like Airbnb her bedroom and she moved into my room so that we could like, cover our expenses. You know, if the first year we made 26,000, then I think the next year we may have made like 56,000, which is great. We're doubling. Yep.

0 (45m 60s):
That's growth. Yep. Yeah.

4 (46m 1s):
We're, we're growing, but, but ultimately we're not really making money. We're not really profitable.

0 (46m 8s):
And Roscoe was doing freelance work on the side.

4 (46m 10s):
Yeah. She's doing freelance work sometimes and I'm, I'm full time and, and I I say full time with like air quotes because it's not like I had any benefits or a salary, but I'm Right. I'm giving this my full attention. Full attention. Yeah. So I was still making the products in my kitchen. Wow. So I was, I was focusing on, on innovation. I'm making new colors and I'm thinking of new marketing ideas because, you know, Roscoe is handling the, the creative in terms of our photo shoots. But basically I'm handling every single thing else because like Right. My first team of friends, that first team had all fizzled out probably within the first, I don't know, nine months. Right.

4 (46m 50s):
So yeah, I'm on social media, I'm documenting the process of me making lipstick and people are really intrigued by that. People can't believe that I'm actually making lipstick in my kitchen.

0 (47m 2s):
So you are grinding away, Rosco is grinding away, you're trying to get this off the ground. You're doing this in New York and I guess around 2013, maybe 2014, you decide to move it to Detroit. Like to, to go back to where you grew up, why I mean, New York, right? Is the global center of fashion, one of the global centers of fashion. Yeah. Certainly the center of like, the fashion industry in the us the big makeup brands I think are headquartered there. So why did you decide to, to leave New York?

4 (47m 40s):
Well, number one, I was running out of money. Right. And I had been thinking about it like, should I stay in New York? We had already made a lot of connections with beauty editors. We had been getting pressed. So I felt like we made a mark and, and we could still grow without being there. And then on top of that, I saw the narrative of Detroit changing

0 (48m 2s):
Around 2013.

4 (48m 4s):
Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, in 2012 when I first started the company, it was all about Detroit and, and Detroit's ruins. Yeah. and in 2014, the narrative was changing. Shinola had just come to Detroit and, and people were investing in Detroit and downtown was becoming cool again. And I was like, wait,

0 (48m 25s):
Bakeries and vegan restaurants and Right. Yeah.

4 (48m 28s):
Yeah. I was like, maybe, maybe it's time for me to go home to, to build this business. And number one, I can be a part of this renaissance. I can make sure that people who look like me are a part of this renaissance. Because, you know, I had been experiencing firsthand what gentrification looks like because I was living in Brooklyn. Yeah, yeah. You know, I never thought that Detroit really deserved the bad reputation that it had gotten. And I wanted to be a part of like, this new thing and, and to meet the movers and shakers that, that were, were making it happen. So I was excited for the city. I just wanted to make sure that black people were a part of, of the resurgence.

0 (49m 10s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Melissa and Roscoe spread the word about The Lip Bar. First on a nationwide tour in a retrofitted airport shuttle bus, and then with an appearance on Shark Tank, which does not go particularly well. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

Airbnb (49m 37s):
Maybe you stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with a spare room or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe your kid is heading off to college in the fall and you'll have an empty bedroom. You could air Airbnb it and make some extra cash while they're away. Or, if you have a vacation plan for this summer, that could be a good time to Airbnb your entire place. Whether. you could use a little extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home or spare room might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot com slash Host.

Apple Card (50m 20s):
Reboot your credit card with Apple Card. The credit card created by Apple. It gives you Unlimited daily cash back that you can now choose to grow in a high yield savings account that's built right into the wallet app. Apply for Apple Card now in the wallet app on iPhone and start growing your daily cash with savings today. Apple card subject to credit approval savings is available to Apple card owners subject to eligibility requirements, savings accounts provided by Goldman Sachs, bank USA. Member F D I C terms apply.

0 (50m 58s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2014 and Melissa Butler has left New York and moved the business to her hometown of Detroit. And she knows that if women could just try her lipstick, could just see the colors, they love it.

4 (51m 17s):
So I knew that I wanted to be in retail, but I knew that we also weren't ready. So I decided that in order to get our products in front of customers, that we would, instead of trying to figure out what counter can we get behind Yep. How do we bring the counter to our customers? And so we built The, Lip Bar truck, which was what we, we deemed the most glamorous beauty experience on wheels. And we went on a tour.

0 (51m 47s):
You built like a, a truck that was decorated with your logo full of like a, like, like an ice cream truck.

4 (51m 55s):
So my ex-boyfriend built party buses, like from his bare hands. Ah, wow. It's basically like a shuttle bus. Right. So, you know, he took out the old funky seats and, you know, built a countertop, like wrapped around the entire bus, built a cash register in the back because the goal was always we're gonna build this truck and then we're gonna go to different cities and park on the street. Right. But then when I, what I learned is that you're supposed to have a permit And this was like the major plot twist. Yeah. But the, the responsible part of me said, okay, why don't we find stores that we can park in front of and partner with, then we could do it without the permit.

4 (52m 39s):
So I started finding partners and in all these different cities that I wanted to go to, and my, our most impressive partnership is that we got Urban Outfitters to agree and, and this is the Urban Outfitters in DC to agree to partner with us. And they, they brought in like water and drinks and they allowed us to park in front and they kind of rolled a red carpet so that it was clearly Wow. Like a part of Urban Outfitters for the day.

0 (53m 6s):
The one in the one in Georgetown?

4 (53m 7s):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So we were able to open up the side doors and we put a TV right there so that if people are just walking by, they can kind of see our messages like flashing in display. So people would naturally stop because they're like, this truck looks cool. So many people thought that it was like drinks naturally. So they would come up, guys would come up and say, what do you got in There? you got beer? And we're like, no, we have lipstick. Come on up, bring your wife. And we, and then like oftentimes the woman would come up because she was so intrigued. She's like, you have lipstick on there. And she would come up and the the whole truck was mirrors and Wow. And she would come on and she would try on the product and, you know, she would more often than not love the product and, and make a purchase.

0 (53m 53s):
And, and how long did this tour last?

4 (53m 56s):
We went on two different tours and I wanna say the first one, which was the largest one, maybe six weeks.

0 (54m 7s):
Wow. Were you able to finance the trip through sales?

4 (54m 10s):
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. So the, the first tour was wonderful and that inspired us to go on a second tour and that's when we went on this like black college tour. So we went back to my alma mater and to drive from Detroit to Florida is crazy and a truck that's not so great. And so a guy on the way back from this like black college tour that we did and we actually made a lot of money and we were really excited about it. Wow. The truck started breaking down and like, I remember we were maybe four hours away and we just kind of stopped the truck and we parked it and we were like, okay, maybe she just needs a rest.

4 (54m 50s):
Okay. Maybe if we just give her some time off. And I think we just let it sit for an hour. And then she took us home and, and that was the last time we really drove it. But yeah, I, I'm so emotional about the truck, so I can't get rid of it.

0 (55m 4s):
Meantime, you still need to get some visibility and so you decide to do something that is really smart, but also really risky, which is to apply to be on Shark Tank.

4 (55m 16s):
Yeah.

0 (55m 17s):
Which is a great idea. But, you know, lots of people apply to Shark Tank. So how did it happen that, that they picked you? Do, do you know?

4 (55m 25s):
Well, I think Shark Tank picked us because we were fun and we were being ourselves. So we submitted a video where we were talking about the product, but also we were hula hooping. So it was kind of gimmicky, but enough to like make you pay attention to what we were saying.

0 (55m 42s):
Yeah. And they want people who are gonna be good on television and fun. Yeah. Yeah. Shark Tank, we had Jamie Siminoff founded a ring on the show. He, he described his experience that it was really terrifying, you know, because you don't meet them until you actually walk out and pitch your product.

4 (56m 1s):
Hi, I'm Melissa Butler. And I'm Roscoe Spears, and we live in Brooklyn, New York. We were kind of nervous and, and they were so cruel to us. Oh my goodness, this

7 (56m 11s):
Is a new innovation. I can see a massive market share in the clown market.

4 (56m 15s):
They told Roscoe that, that she looked dead. They, that she looked

0 (56m 21s):
Dead

4 (56m 21s):
Because of the color of her lipstick.

7 (56m 23s):
So Roscoe, aren't you worried if you walked into a bar with that color, Lip, somebody try to resuscitate you?

4 (56m 30s):
What you end up seeing is probably seven or eight minutes. But we were recording for maybe an hour. So I'm explaining to them that, that the industry is changing and that the bigger companies are slow to change and we're the smaller company and, and we're fast to change and that's, that's our strength. And they were like, well, if the big companies wanted to do it, they just would, and they would crush you. Like the colorful cockroaches you are is exactly what they said and

7 (56m 56s):
They would crush you like the colorful cockroaches. You are, you only have so many minutes on earth. Don't waste them trying to sell lipstick. I'm out.

0 (57m 7s):
Wow. You know, there's a shtick there that kind of, that that mean kind of shtick. Totally. And that's part of what they do. But, but I think, I think Kevin O'Leary said, Hey, the chances that this business will succeed are zero, practically zero.

4 (57m 22s):
And what, what they didn't show on air is that when he said like, don't waste your time trying to sell lipstick, they then went into this whole internal debate on like what we actually should be doing. They're like, listen, yeah, you're beautiful girls. Your dresses are nice. Why don't you go into the fashion business? Which is so offensive. And, and I have been, been so prepared to talk numbers because like, here I am like a former finance girl and like I, I'm ready to talk business. And they didn't, I think the most disappointing thing for us wasn't that they called us Colorful cockroaches. Like I actually didn't even care about that statement at the time. I think that it was more offensive that they did not even consider us as businesswomen.

0 (58m 3s):
But it sounds like, it sounds like even though you felt like they were not so kind, that it forced you to refine the story you were telling about Lip Bar, about The, Lip Bar.

4 (58m 19s):
It did. And it forced me to start thinking more so about how we market the company. Mark Cuban was really adamant around me being at the forefront of the brand. He was like, look, your story is really cool. You need to step into, into your brand. You need to be your storyteller. At this time, I was not at the, the forefront of the business. I didn't want Melissa Butler to be The Lip Bar. I wanted The Lip Bar to be The Lip Bar, and for Melissa Butler to be Melissa Butler. And so over time, I did realize that that was hurting the company with me not being at the forefront. Because today people are looking for brands that are gonna be more transparent and, and they wanna know who's behind the business,

0 (59m 3s):
Who is a person. Yeah, yeah,

4 (59m 5s):
Yeah.

0 (59m 6s):
Alright, so you come back to, you come back to Detroit and eventually this, this Shark Tank episode airs. Cause I think they, they end up airing like six or seven months after they're actually filmed.

4 (59m 16s):
Yeah. And we had no idea. They don't really warn

0 (59m 18s):
You. They don't tell you. Right.

4 (59m 19s):
We found out maybe 10 days in advance.

0 (59m 22s):
And did, even though you got kind of pilloried by them, that must have helped your visibility.

4 (59m 27s):
Oh, it's crazy. Oh, our website crashed that night. I wanna say we had like 40,000 hits to the website within just a couple of minutes. Wow. We had all this stuff on like back order. We couldn't like, maintain the orders. I was still shipping the orders, I think, and Shark Tank really like fast tracked us into like hiring people. Yeah.

0 (59m 49s):
By the way, you were still, this is just being financed entirely through cashflow at you completely not raised any money or anything. You're, you're hiring people and paying them probably a small salary and offering them some equity,

4 (1h 0m 1s):
Really just paying them a small salary. Right. So, and we're hiring entry level people, right. Basically like hourly workers to just help us ship the orders. And we had just started transitioning into getting the products manufactured. Hmm. So that was my goal, like, okay, well Melissa, you need to get your product manufactured so that you can then launch into retail. Wow. And then it was time I was like, I'm gonna find a retailer and, and Target. It was our, our goal

0 (1h 0m 27s):
Target was your goal

4 (1h 0m 28s):
Target was the only people we pitched.

0 (1h 0m 30s):
And now Target, everybody wants to be in Target. Right. I mean, that's like the top place to get into. They get pitched a million times a a day. Did you even have any connections? Like how, how, who did you, who did you know, to call?

4 (1h 0m 42s):
I had no connections and I, I, so I couldn't call anyone, but I'm gonna just start reaching out to the buyers. And so I went on LinkedIn and I started searching for target buyers, like color cosmetics buyers. Like I was searching everything. I love that beauty buyer color, cosmetics buyer, target buyer. And I think I was like emailing like 12 different people. So this is probably an eight month, eight month process of me stalking people at Target.

0 (1h 1m 11s):
Wow. And, and so after eight months of stalking people, you eventually do connect with a, a target buyer. I think a makeup buyer. Yeah. And, and I'm, I'm curious, like what, what did you say in your email to her? Because I mean, I'm sure that, that this buyer w was getting lots of emails and, and, and you had to stand out. So what did you write?

4 (1h 1m 33s):
Oh, I mean, I threw the whole kitchen sink in. I told her a little bit about the story and about our truck and how cool we are and how, you know, I think we had maybe 40,000 followers on social media or something. I told her that everything was vegan and cruelty free. I talked about how cool our packaging was, but I think the, the real thing that stood out was that I talked more than anything about what we could do for Target instead of what Target could do for us. Huh. I'm like, my customers shopping there and she's not shopping there for makeup.

0 (1h 2m 5s):
Huh.

4 (1h 2m 5s):
And it's because you don't have me basically. Wow. And so on my second follow up, she came back and was like, oh wait, your packaging actually is really cool. Can you send me some samples? And I probably screamed, I don't know. You screamed. I screamed and I, I probably took a lap around my house cause that's what I do and I'm really excited. Yeah. And then we had a call and she was like, look, I think that your brand is really cool, but I also, I know that your brand is really small and like maybe too small for Target. I don't know. And she was like, but I'm willing to take a chance and allow you to drop shit on target.com. Like, do you wanna launch on target.com? And I'm like, absolutely. Wow. And so what we did was we launched a brand new color and we blasted it to our audience.

4 (1h 2m 50s):
But you couldn't get it on our website. You could only get it on target.com.

0 (1h 2m 54s):
But how did you, I mean, there's thousands, tens of thousands of products on target.com. How did you gain visibility on, on, on the website initially?

4 (1h 3m 3s):
So the thing about launching in a retailer is it's not their job to sell your product. It's your job to sell your product. Right. So we literally pushed all of our, like our emails, our social media followers, all our friends and family. It was like a brand new launch. Like, oh my God, we're in Target. We were so excited. We sh we shared it with our community in a way where it was a win for all of us. Like, can you believe that The, Lip Bar is now on target.com. Wow. And and they, they bought that color and, and it sold out actually. And she was like, okay, I wanna introduce you to the store buyer, essentially. And we pitched it and we were launching in Target nine months later.

0 (1h 3m 41s):
Wow. You know, I think a lot of people will walk into a Target and think, oh, all the products here, the people who make them are probably multi-millionaires. But it's actually not that simple because there's lots of products at Target and you gotta sell them. But I have to imagine that being on the shelves at Target meant that you started to generate some revenue that, that started to make your business sustainable.

4 (1h 4m 6s):
Yeah. So we launched and we went into 44 stores. That was the test that was offered. We didn't have a marketing budget, but we had a publicist. We hired a publicist. And the reality is the makeup aisle didn't really have any small businesses. So the fact that we have shelf space in Target as this really small brand was like an anomaly. Yeah. So we had this huge PR campaign, you know, a lot of people started talking about it. Refinery 29 talked about it, team Vogue talked about it. Yep. And we, we had like the number one selling lipstick for the first month of our launch with no marketing budget.

4 (1h 4m 47s):
And Target was like, whoa, we weren't expecting this of this brand. And so we grew very quickly. So we went from 40 stores to I think 144 stores. And then we went into like 400 stores and now we're in about 500 stores about to expand again.

0 (1h 5m 4s):
Wow. You, I think in 2018 for the first time you, you brought in some outside funding, you got an outside investment. Did you ever, I mean, think about pitching to VCs and to venture, you know, to, to investors or did, did that investment kind of, did they kind of come to you and say, Hey, we wanna, we wanna invest?

4 (1h 5m 24s):
Well, it's a mixture of both. So now we're in target stores. Right. And, and we're growing in Target and Yeah. You know, we needed money, we needed money for

0 (1h 5m 33s):
To finance the business.

4 (1h 5m 34s):
Yeah. Cuz this is inventory and, and the beauty industry is not necessarily replenishable. So the average woman, it may take her eight months to even use her favorite lipstick. And I remember having calls with investors and, and pitching people and they would all say like, Melissa, you're so impressive. Like, you're such an impressive founder, but we're not gonna, we're not gonna invest. The reality is guy, black women are starting businesses faster than any other group of people Yeah. In this country. But we're not getting funding. And also because we're not getting funding, we can't really grow our ideas. So if we really wanna like reduce the wealth gap in this country, we're gonna have to start giving opportunities to, to women who look like me.

0 (1h 6m 21s):
Tristan Walker was on the show founder of Walker and Company Bevel as his best, best known product. And he pointed on the show that if you look at the beauty industry and consumers, by far, far and away on a proportional basis, black consumers spend more money on beauty products than any other group in the United States.

4 (1h 6m 45s):
Yeah. It's been reported that we spend nine times Yeah. Anyone else on beauty. But meanwhile, you know, black businesses, black beauty businesses aren't well funded. So for a smaller company it's like we have to fight tooth and nail to get a little funding. Yeah.

0 (1h 7m 4s):
Yeah. And, and, and I should say you were able to finally get some money from a fund that was started by the beauty entrepreneur, Isha Lou Dennis, which is a fund, I think he started for black women founders in, in 2018. And then in 2019 you decided to actually open a brick and mortar store in Detroit, which is I think really close to the Shinola store, right? Yeah.

4 (1h 7m 26s):
We're right behind the Shola store. We're basically in their alley. And I had never even wanted a store just because like, no, I don't wanna maintain a store or think about a store. We, we were already in Target. But the thing about Detroit is even with its resurgence, there's still very little within the city limits. So, you know, I felt like this was my opportunity to really like, again, be a part of that renaissance and, and really give people the opportunity to shop high quality makeup. Yeah. And it really warmed my heart guy because, you know, we opened in the dead of winter, we opened on our, on our birthday essentially, and we opened to a line of maybe 200 people Wow.

4 (1h 8m 17s):
In the, in the dead of winter. Like, it's freezing. Like, because

0 (1h 8m 20s):
People were just so excited about that, about this, this opening.

4 (1h 8m 24s):
People were so excited. This is a city where there frankly isn't a lot of opportunity. And so typically people have to leave to build something and you know, and I, I am a person who left, but then I came back and they've, they've shown me so much love. Like The, Lip, Bar has grown since we've come back. Like we five x the business since I've moved back to Detroit.

0 (1h 8m 49s):
Of course. Then 2020 happens, COVID shut down the retail business really gets hit. Parts of the beauty industry do. Okay. But there is a slowdown. Did did, did you guys see a pretty significant slowdown, you know, once Covid became a reality in, in March and April? Yeah.

4 (1h 9m 9s):
What's crazy is like February was such a good month for us. February was unprecedented. But you know, I think it was just preparing us for what was next. Yeah. You know, people always talk about the lipstick effect, which is this idea that even in an economic recession or even a depression, women will still rely on those small novelties that make them feel good. But you typically only put on makeup when you're leaving the house. And no one was leaving. And we were really, we were really concerned, if, I'm gonna be just completely honest, I was like, I don't know how we're gonna survive this business.

4 (1h 9m 54s):
The goal and the approach was really to just do the things that we had always done, which is like just continuously connect with our customers and meet them where they are. Our relationship with our customer is so strong because we actually are our customer. So, you know, I'm not married, I'm on online dates right now. And so I'm looking, you know, how do I update my profile? How do I look cute for my FaceTime date? How do I instill confidence to my team? And for me that was like very easily Lip color. I was like, by putting on this Lip color, like I look a little bit more alive, I look more confident, I look like I'm ready for the day.

4 (1h 10m 35s):
And we pivoted our messaging and then very quickly our sales rebounded. So while March was a tough month, April was, we had grown back to like our norm and then June with the whole Black Lives Matter and, and this, this more apparent need to support small businesses and particularly small black-owned businesses. We had our best month ever.

0 (1h 10m 58s):
Wow. Yeah. I mean, you know, a lot of a growing awareness and and desire among many people who are watching the, and taking part in the protests against racial injustice to support black businesses. And a lot of black entrepreneurs we've had on the show have talked about those months as being, they were just overwhelmed with the, with what happened to their businesses and, and the attention that they received during that time. Does that continue for you? Has it, has it been sustained?

4 (1h 11m 29s):
Our sales have sustained but that level of support? No, I think that, I mean for me, I didn't expect it to. Yeah. So I remember when it was happening, I call an all hands meeting with my team and I said, look, we're getting flooded right now and it's our goal and it's our job to make sure that these aren't charity dollars. And that's the thing. Like we don't, as, as a black business owner, I don't want you to support my business. I want you to shop my products because you think that this is, cause this

0 (1h 12m 1s):
Is great.

4 (1h 12m 1s):
Exactly. Because we make it easy for you to understand what products work for your complexion, not because you feel bad about something. And like, our goal is to have lifetime value, you know, with our customer and have this, this more than transactional relationship with our customer.

0 (1h 12m 19s):
Yeah. And, and I mean, you guys have, have branched out into all kinds of makeup like you do eyeshadow and, and foundation and concealer and, and even like the lipstick colors that you're doing now, I guess you're offering, I guess you'd say like more sort of mainstream colors as well.

4 (1h 12m 35s):
So over time we've, I mean we've of course evolved, you know, when we first launched we were really just trying to make a statement and we had to introduce some practicality. So now we have, you know, we have everything, we have like over 16 nudes cuz again, we're really driving that whole like, my god beauty for every single complexion. And we have the best reds, like Michelle Obama just wore our red, which is our bestseller in the whole company. Yeah. It's crazy. But we, we stay true to who we are. We still have a black lipstick, we still have a blue lipstick, we have tons of purple. So it's, it's a balance between like, how do we leave something for people to get creative or, you know, reimagine themselves even if it's just for one night.

0 (1h 13m 18s):
So, so let's say you're sort of, I mean you are obviously growing and growing fast and your brand awareness is growing really fast. Do you think, I mean, can you imagine, do you think you can grow to, you know, at scale to become a huge brand independently? Or do you think eventually, like other cosmetics brands like Benefit or you know, other brands that were event eventually became huge that you would have to be purchased or partnered, you know, with a bigger company, a L'Oreal or Revlon or l v Mh or you know, one of these huge multinationals. Do you think that, I mean, could you see a world where you would partner or you would, you know, be, become part of their portfolio to, if it meant that you would become like, you know, ubiquitous everywhere around the world and airports and duty free shops and so on?

4 (1h 14m 9s):
Yeah, I mean, I think if we had the opportunity to really become like this world renowned brand, then I, I think that that would be the perfect way to like cement the legacy and all of the hard work that, that myself and my team has been doing over the last eight years. Because having all of these high and low moments, you know, they've come at the expensive of, of lots of things, right? There have been times where I've been, you know, a bad sister or a bad friend or a bad girlfriend or a bad daughter because I've been sacrificing for, for the business. So I think the ultimate way to, to say this was worth it is having this brand that, that really makes makeup more inclusive and makes makeup easier and, and really has this like landmark and this, this leaves its mark on the beauty industry.

0 (1h 15m 3s):
When, when you think of your journey Melissa, how much of your success do you think has to do with the hard work that you put in and your intelligence? And how much do you think is because you just, you got lucky at times

4 (1h 15m 21s):
And, and of course I know this question is coming, but it it's a really tough question. I think, I think earlier on it was all hard work and I think that hard work is still, you know, I'm still receiving the fruits of that labor and nowadays I'm thinking it's luck. So I don't think any anyone can fully take credit. I think that sometimes the universe is just in alignment and right now I really feel good.

0 (1h 15m 49s):
That's Melissa Butler, founder and CEO of The Lip Bar. And by the way, after nearly a decade in the beauty business, Melissa says, when it comes to putting on her own makeup,

4 (1h 16m 1s):
Yes, I'm a beauty founder, but no, I don't know how to do makeup. And people who I would meet, they would say, you shouldn't say that. And I'm like, why? It's true. I don't know how to do my makeup and like, and I've tried to do a YouTube video and I came out looking like a fool. Like I looked, I looked nothing like that tutorial.

0 (1h 16m 21s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app. It's usually a plus right at the top, so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. This episode was produced by James Desi with music composed by Rum Teen Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Daryth Gayles. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Carrie Thompson, Sam Paulson, Liz Metzger, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon music.

0 (1h 17m 6s):
Download the Amazon music app today. Or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Papier (1h 17m 28s):
A blank page holds infinite possibilities. It stirs our passions and is a space to become papier takes all the wonder and potential of a blank page and creates premium quality stationary journals, notebooks, planners, and more. Each product is crafted with thoughtful details and gorgeous hand drawn designs. Each page is as special as the thoughts you put in them. Best of all, their products can be personalized for free, to be uniquely yours or to make an unforgettable gift for someone in your life. Pop's high quality Notebooks are a beautiful place to keep your notes, ideas, and memories. And with their undated planners, you can organize and track life at your own pace. Make each day noteworthy for yourself or someone you love with Popier. Visit popier.com for 10% off your first order. That's 10% off@papier.com.