2 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message

1 (3s):
come from just works just works gives entrepreneurs and their teams access to benefits payroll

2 (9s):
compliance support and H are all

1 (11s):
in one place get two months free by going to just works.com how I built this

2 (17s):
so really quick before we start the show. I want to tell you about our how I built this live tour. It's happening this fall supported by American Express. I'll be in New York talking with Christina Tosi of Milk Bar in Boston with Luke Holden and been Kana founders of Luke's Lobster and wrapping up the tour in Denver with Kurt Richardson founder of Otter Products. You can get tickets for all these shows and get more information at NPR presents dot-org and I hope to see you there.

1 (48s):
Well, there's a lot of absurd of exchanges we had this guy who had run Champion the brand sure and he was helping us out and he would ask us very basic questions. Like, you know, what do you got for assets? Now like we got a mountain bike and we were dead serious. We didn't even know how to answer a question. Like we got the VCR. We that picture mom and he was just like dumbfounded looking at us like these guys are so clueless.

2 (1m 24s):
Ramen PR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Gyros and on today's show how Bert and John Jacobs rescued. They're floundering t-shirt business with three simple words life is good and then turn that phrase into a brand and a 100 million dollar business. Most big brands have a slogan just do it fly the friendly Skies think different the slogan is there to help sell the shoes or the airline or the computer?

2 (2m 5s):
It's there to boost the brand. But now imagine if the brand was the slogan. So instead of Nike the product you are buying was just do it or instead of a razor. You were buying the words the best a man can get that is essentially the brand you're going to hear about on the show today because I'm like almost every story. We've profiled Bert and John Jacobs didn't really sell a specific product or offer a specific service. What they're selling is an idea an attitude a way of seeing the world and that idea can be summed up in the phrase life is good.

2 (2m 47s):
That's it. That's what they sell those three words life is Good Bert and John Jacob started experimenting with this phrase back in the mid-1990s at the time. They were barely scraping by they were selling T-shirts on street corners and in college dorms. So at one point, they tried something new they drew a picture of a guy with a wide grin on his face wrote Life Is Good underneath and amazingly the shirt started to sell today life is good is a 100 million dollar brand sold in stores all across the country and the slogan is not only on t-shirts but on socks and keychains posters magnets mugs tote bags towels even tire covers things that presumably would not be selling so well or so fast if they did not say life is good Burt John can actually trace the idea behind the slogan to their childhood and as you'll hear to their mom in particular, The brothers grew up in Needham Massachusetts.

2 (3m 55s):
They were the youngest of six kids their dad worked at a machine shop and he and their mom had trouble making ends meet but the way John and Bert tell it the early years of the family before they were born. We're actually pretty

1 (4m 9s):
good early on when we look at the photographs of our older brothers and sisters before our time that little house was the American dream. It was the lawn was manicured and paint was perfect on the home. The shutters were all on and everything just looked my sisters were in like matching dresses. That was not the house we grew up in so that was probably typical of families with a lot of kids by the time it came to us. The grass was knee-high and the shutters were have fallen off and broken windows in the winter and it was just too much action too many people for one small little place, etc. Etc, you know financially not enough money there and they were just there was no

2 (4m 51s):
space so lots of so, Busy, I mean as a guest kids, it must have been a pretty kind of chaotic home

1 (4m 57s):
chaotix a good word guy day-to-day. Yeah. It was kind of Madness there was there was no heat in the Upper Floor ever. So our oldest four siblings would just pile on blankets and some of them were chattering away barely sleeping and others are brother Allen. For some reason. We just sleep in his tighty whities with no blanket and just lie there and nor them but but those frost on the window, I mean, I'm not no exaggeration. It was it was pretty strange and funny when we when we look back but chaotic is a good

2 (5m 32s):
word and what we perish like I mean, will they like warm and fuzzy where they strike two, like with a different kinds of people? Well, they were really

1 (5m 41s):
different from each other. Our dad was very structured and idealistic and definitely a math and science sort of engineering type of mine. And our mom was the absolute opposite gregarious outgoing always laughing dancing very creative. But then I think you know, they went to some some big changes when John and I were in elementary school our parents were in a near-death car accident and that seems to be a bit pivotal because on our dad lost the use of his right arm entirely and he never really regained that he was a gifted Craftsman.

1 (6m 24s):
He was a Avid Outdoorsman and I think he was pretty frustrated that he couldn't do those things any longer and did it change

2 (6m 34s):
the way he looked at life once he lost the use of his hand.

1 (6m 39s):
Yeah. I just think he became frustrated with his body and he was a pretty physical guy and it certainly did seem when we look at kind of before and after that that he became depressed and that depression seem Manifest itself in constant yelling and screaming and he'd go on these tie rates just screaming yelling at everything whether it was us or our mom or you know football is lying in a on the ground or baseball's or anything the house falling apart. I think that it was already very challenging and there was tremendous economic strain and maybe that American dream was felt as though it crumbled down and it always seemed manageable to us as kids.

1 (7m 24s):
But we really weren't seeing it Through The Eyes of the person who was responsible for things. Was it

2 (7m 31s):
scary. Do you guys have remember being scared when you were kids

1 (7m 35s):
very much. So, yeah, and it wasn't I never remember him hitting us. But yeah, it's a there was another kind of fear to that. Like I remember fearing that that just whole family was just crumbling and that I didn't know what was going to happen but like a lot of times He would yell straight through the night but it wasn't all one way like that. He would apologize. You know, when he kind of got his wits about him. He would say, you know that I don't mean to be like that and I'm not trying to hurt anybody and those kind of things so he did have some level of awareness and I think we all kind of maintained the idea that he was a good guy

2 (8m 16s):
when you guys were and yet 66 of you total you the two of you are the youngest you about three years apart. So with the two of you fairly close from an early age

1 (8m 28s):
really close we so we shared a bunk beds had our own room together and I was just thinking as we discussed our dad like humor was our best weapon not against him but just to have laughs with each other about anything really and we just remember us trying to be the last guy to get the other brother to laugh before we went to bed, which would go till 11:00 midnight one sometimes so I would say really tight growing up into similar stuff into sports and art and to music and then high schools different when there's a three year Gap technically four-year gap between grades, right?

1 (9m 10s):
Yeah. There was a probably a period in high school when I was a senior in John was a freshman we wouldn't say hi to each other in the hallway was just a short period of time so

2 (9m 18s):
you I guess Burt you went to because you're older you went to college first. You want to Villanova and I guess to Fitchburg State in Massachusetts and John you you were at UMass Amherst did either of you at that point in your lives think about like that you were going to create a business one day.

1 (9m 37s):
Yeah. I was pretty focused on that. I had actually had a couple businesses when I was really young I had a seed selling business which was really a commission thing cut out of a magazine. But by the time I was in high school, I had a house-painting business, so I was pretty focused. Stan the idea of Entrepreneurship and John I had done a little bit with like landscaping in high school and right at the beginning a college but my focus was mostly art and writing

2 (10m 7s):
when you say art, like drawing and painting and things like that as well

1 (10m 10s):
exactly drawing painting animation any form like

2 (10m 14s):
that? Okay. So I guess after you guys finished College both of you head out west I guess Bert you go to Colorado and then John you go to California. Right? Right. And then I guess it was around 88 89 both of you meet up in California. And then you decide to drive back together back to Boston and then sort of figure out what you're gonna do next with your lies. Like what was that the plan

1 (10m 44s):
well, it was more like let's do a cross country trip. Like it really hadn't thought about what happens on the other end. We were really excited. We had never done. We had never driven anywhere outside of New England. So I don't think we were all that ambitious at the time. We were more living in the moment and saying we got an opportunity here to swim in some water holes that we've never seen and let's go find them and let's just go camp out and something we hadn't done before and we really took advantage that summer. I think it was a seven or eight week drive across the country with our brother Alan occasionally hooking us up wiring US money, but we're sleeping in a tent or just by the side of the road or in the back of the

2 (11m 28s):
car. So you see you're doing this road trip. Yeah, making your way across the country and you get to back to Massachusetts, right? And I guess presumably be on the Mass Pike right going down through western Mass coming in. That's right. Yeah. And I don't know if it's apocryphal but I've heard that that's really when you sort of like the two of you are driving and one of you is like hey, maybe we should like do a business. Is that is that

1 (11m 53s):
really true? That is true? Yeah. It was first time we talked about it was on that

2 (11m 56s):
trip. What do you remember about the conversation? Well, I remember that

1 (11m 60s):
we started talking about that. Both of us in college had designed a couple of t-shirts and sold them around the dorms. And what a kick we got out of it.

2 (12m 12s):
What were the T? What were your t-shirt designs in college just out of curiosity.

1 (12m 15s):
Well, they were caricatures of you know, intramural teams and really simple stuff like funky dancing figures or one at that time. I guess it we were talking late 80s. It was like, oh you can do with one with the price of one color. You can get a rainbow across the letter M like it was it was nothing groundbreaking but like oh we do a big On the front and then these cool like dancing figures on the back, but it was more as bird started to say like getting total strangers to wear your art or and it didn't happen a lot. But occasionally it see it in the dorm and like wow that felt good.

1 (12m 56s):
How are you guys like like

2 (12m 57s):
silk screening your own shirts?

1 (12m 59s):
No. No, we never knew it was ever got into the screen printing. In fact, we didn't even once we started the business for a long time. It was more going to a local screen printer and you know, would you just bought major Mill Hanes beefy t or Fruit of the Loom or something like that from a distributor? And and that was I remember talking with John that it was a charge to feel that a stranger was going to reach in their pocket and pay money for something that you created. But also we've always loved t-shirts and it is a great vehicle for messages like the look around and people have made a choice what they're going to share with people.

1 (13m 39s):
That's a really big decision. It sounds very casual but With the T-shirt. Generally you're kind of making a statement. What do you believe in? What do you for?

2 (13m 48s):
So you guys you guys get back to Boston? And by the way, when you got back to Boston, did you guys like move back in to your parents house?

1 (13m 55s):
We did he flee? Yeah, she back your parents house

2 (13m 59s):
and you have you have decided we are going to be let's let's make some T-shirts and sell them and I understand you could take your design to a silkscreen ER and they could just make a bunch of t-shirts that you hand over to them. What were the designs that you decided on making it first? What are the t-shirts look

1 (14m 18s):
like? Well, we had a lot of Concepts and ideas and designs and some of the stuff we had from college. We did an Irish t-shirt on st. Patrick's day that said tis. No sin not to be Irish just a terrible terrible shame and not cracked people up and Boston's heavily Irish. So, you know, we thought well, maybe that's something we can do is celebrate the different holidays. And so we did something for Valentine's Day and something for Mother's Day and you know that that kind of kept things going a little bit but nothing was nothing was really ring in the register too much and what you're just like going around

2 (14m 55s):
Boston and and like setting up tables and selling them. How are you? How are you selling them?

1 (15m 1s):
What we had two duffel bags and after the first six months we bought a Massachusetts state Hawkers and Peddlers license and we also bought a Boston City Hawkers and Peddlers license that was helpful because you know the police would when you're on the street selling police will approach you most of the time they would say you can't sell here. Okay. So like we would try to sell right in Harvard Square on the street. They can't sell their they the cops would move you out. We try to sell near Faneuil Hall by the time you went where it was legal for the Hawkers and Peddlers license you'd be on some sidewalk where there's no foot. Traffic would be impossible. So you had to kind of push it every day and every day we get to hustle.

1 (15m 42s):
Yeah. We did and it got to the point since we did this for many years it got to the point where all the cops in Boston knew our names and they would we would hear them on the radio say Jacobs brothers are out on the corner of calm AB, you know, like one guy would sometimes walk down the end of the block and watch for the cops and the other guy would you know, we went from duffel bags to setting up a little card table and then we finally got we finally got enough sales that we decided that the one place where were selling better than the street was when we went to college dormitories. But how did the out of that

2 (16m 18s):
work you would just drive to colleges and like open up the door. I guess this is back in the day when they weren't locked and you have just walk in and

1 (16m 25s):
like yeah, they weren't locked most places were not locked and you're right. It would probably be really hard today. So in some of the Cities they were but we started doing that in in Boston. There's more colleges and universities per capita in Boston than anywhere in the world.

2 (16m 39s):
But what would you do you would walk down the corridors of dorm? Like the dorm room

1 (16m 44s):
core doors doors doors. Yeah

2 (16m 46s):
weird for sale. Zou knock on the door.

1 (16m 48s):
Yeah, we would hustle. I mean you would actually run from door to door run up the steps because we quickly learned that the weekend Nobody's around enough and in the daytime, you can't find anybody. So we quickly learned that the meat was in the middle of the week and the evening at you know, probably about like six o'clock to ten o'clock. That was your wheelhouse. So you try to cover a whole campus. That means you got to be moving at Olympic speed to try to get through it. So especially if we had a little bit of sales going we were just push push push and then either try to crash in a random Lounge on their floor or more often just sleep in the back of our van.

2 (17m 31s):
I'm just trying to put myself in the position of like a college student that time and I get a knock on the door and then maybe these two guys are one guy like with a duffel bag and we would say what like a dog Like yes, and then you would say what

1 (17m 45s):
any interest in a t-shirt like this and you just take it out in hockey and it was actually not an uncommon thing. I don't know about these days but banging on the dorm selling T-shirts with something people did what was unusual for us was that we would knock on someone's door and we'd be down in Virginia, you know, and they would say what year you guys and we said we don't go to school. They said where are you from? We say Boston? That's what are you doing down here? And when we explain to people that we've been traveling in a van selling T-shirts from Boston, they were blown away.

2 (18m 17s):
I'm still trying to figure out what's on the T-shirt. I'm standing in my dorm room. You're knocking on my door. You show me a shirt. What does it say? What does it look

1 (18m 26s):
like? It's some of it has no words. It's just these like funds funky dancing figures and it's it's big figures or yeah, they're there but more fluid like

2 (18m 38s):
Heath Herring style

1 (18m 40s):
a little bit. Yeah a little bit a little bit primitive, but a lot of things were sort of you could definitely see elements that ended up being part of life is good. So another thing we did was celebrating the outdoors a lot. We just didn't have words all the time. We would just do an interesting stylized sketch of pine trees and mountains or a mountain bike or something like that, but it just didn't have the hook. You know, none of these things were selling like crazy. And yeah, we also started talking about we had all this time in the van and we started talking about Brands we talked about Nike a lot. You know how the swoosh came to mean athletic prowess and being a champion and all those different things and we talked about how Ralph Lauren And that little pony came to me and affluence Etc.

1 (19m 32s):
And while these things didn't seem to be the thing. We were chasing we kept saying, you know, what's our swoosh. What's our Little Pony kind of thing and we need it. We knew that we needed something to connect with people on and we knew that we didn't have that.

2 (19m 46s):
Remember what your black Revenue average year Revenue might have been at that time.

1 (19m 51s):
It was extremely low, right? It was probably, you know under $80,000 in top-line Revenue,

2 (19m 59s):
but you had to pay for the t-shirts. And so your profit was probably

1 (20m 3s):
the prophet was a prophet was probably twenty thousand dollars and you got to pay for, you know gasoline and you got to pay for yeah, everything's you know, but we didn't that entire time. We didn't get a single hotel room. We would shower on the college campuses. We would brush our teeth on the college campuses if we couldn't do that at the college, we'd find a local restaurant and we'd go Sure to take a shower in the sink. Right right. Maybe we would splurge on a pizza at that time probably five bucks or something that night. But otherwise we were getting by on nothing and we knew if we couldn't keep going enough if we couldn't Propel ourselves enough to get gas and get to the next town in the back of our heads and must have been the reality that real jobs were something we had to consider and our friends actually were having real lives evolve.

1 (21m 1s):
They were having relationships. They were getting homes or apartments. They had real suits and going to real jobs. And that was sometimes embarrassing if we'd be out on the street with with runny noses at like 10 degrees in December trying to sell a T-shirt and bump into somebody but most for the most part Burton. I really wanted to make a go of this. To make it happen and that meant just finding a way to get to the next campus and try to find something that it finally clicked with

2 (21m 36s):
people. So at this point were you thinking was any part of either of you thinking, you know, maybe this t-shirt thing isn't the right way to go. We're doing it for you know for five years and

1 (21m 50s):
no I think I just when I think of like people trying to start a business to imply that there was never doubts is just not real so they weren't at the Forefront of our minds and I think having another guy so when you knew so well was really necessary to laugh off all those nights where we either sold 0 shirts or got kicked off campus or something was wrong that, you know, the dorms were really high security and we couldn't go in this school. If one of us was solo doing that every night for 5 years like it we wouldn't allow lasted we were able just Like we were in the bunk bed when things were tense in the house.

1 (22m 32s):
We were able to play off some character. We had just met imitate them make up a funny song about him or something and just start moving toward the next school, right? And then we had an idea. You know, we just stayed in the game long enough to have a good idea. I mean if you really break it down, we had five and a half years of bad ideas and then one good

2 (22m 54s):
one. What happened in 1994. Well, how did you what happened to your t-shirt business that made you think you know, we should really do this. What was the thing that happened?

1 (23m 5s):
The actual idea for life is good. We sort of stumbled into that. We do we still got to the point where the business was performing, you know poorly enough that we couldn't even sustain it. So we took jobs as substitute teachers back in Boston, and we got an apartment together. So we'd work as substitute teachers for a Months and then we get on the road for about 6 weeks at a time and then we teach for a little while and then we would take off and we got to have this ritual where when we came back to Boston. We'd throw a keg party and we'd invite all of our friends and we put all of our artwork up on the walls and we kind of have a focus focus group would let our friends write on the walls and tell us what they liked and didn't like and that's when one of the things that went up on the wall the the Jake drawing went up and it didn't say life is good under it.

1 (24m 1s):
It said draw so it was this idea that Jake was an artist and I guess we

2 (24m 6s):
should just explain here for a sec that this drawing that you do this guy that you called Jake but this was a super simple drawings like it was almost like a kids drawing of a face with this like big giant toothless. Grin. Yeah,

1 (24m 22s):
you know, he had a beret on he was he was cool and it was like sunglasses. Bray made him the artist the sunglasses made him cool and the big smile because he was happy and a girl who's at that party circled Jake and put an arrow to him and said this guy's got life figured out and we thought that was pretty cool when we woke up in the morning. We were looking we say, wow. What if what if that guy's not just an artist. What if he's a superhero whose power is his optimism and because he believes anything is possible it is and we started riffing on it and there are all sorts of other positive comments and Post Its and people writing on the wall around this one drawing.

1 (25m 3s):
We had encouraged people that give us any feedback but there was so much action around this one drawing and we just sort of distilled all the comments down to these three simple words life is good and those words changed our lives

2 (25m 18s):
forever. And what what was life is I mean, I mean, what would a life is good supposed to mean what's that supposed to mean like the easy life, you know life is easy. You know, everyone will like was it aspirational? What was this supposed to

1 (25m 36s):
convey? So I think we liked the openness of it. We like the fact that it was up to the receiver. It felt based in gratitude. I don't know if we use the that word back then but it was like yes, our business was floundering and barely getting by but we did feel lucky to be traveling drawing meeting people. We love to do all those things and it just picked up steam that first day pretty soon people are reading deeper into it and they're sharing a story what those three words mean and once we got a chance to put it in front of total strangers, it was so immediate the reaction.

2 (26m 14s):
Like, how did you unveil it to people?

1 (26m 17s):
We got out on a about a week after we came up with the idea we got to ask. Fair and Cambridge Mass. And we were used to selling about 10 charts in a whole day and we'd have friends help out is kind of fun social but there wasn't a swarm of customers around our table and that particular day was unlike any other I mean, we opened 11 a.m. At the fair and by noon All 48 charts that said life is good on them were gone and it was such a wide range of people skateboarder schoolteacher Harley-Davidson guy and that's what was astounding to us.

1 (26m 57s):
Like it didn't seem to matter what their background or passion wasn't it was speaking to

2 (27m 2s):
people. I'm here's the thing. There's something almost counterintuitive about what you were introducing in 1994 because I remember 1994. I was just starting out college and it was like grunge and cynicism especially among young people like that was the way to be life is good like you must have gotten Lot of eye rolls right like that. It just seems so counterintuitive to try and sell that to college kids at a time when so many of them would have been like you guys are lame or this is

1 (27m 34s):
silly. Yeah, there's those. Definitely we got our share of that. And once we started selling it to retailers, even the ones who are doing well with it would say to us. I seen a lot of t-shirt Brands come and go this will be gone in two years. But if we can back up a minute like I think before selling the t-shirts, we felt really connected to this message and when we were growing up, you know, we talked about our dads depression in the yelling and screaming but when we may be touched a little on our mother's role, but there was a huge influence she had on us in teaching us that you have control over your energy and that and so she started this ritual at the dinner table.

1 (28m 23s):
We should look around at our six kids and say tell me something good that happened today. If Ike later. We went back to her and said, you know you were the original inspiration for life is good. And she said well, you know, how is that and we said, you know, when you ask tell me something good and she kind of pushed it off and said I was doing that for me. I was doing that for my own psyche, you know was interesting because she probably was doing it for her own sake but we benefited tremendously and we kind of got taught this lesson that you know rather than be the victims of this dysfunctional home. We can look around and focus on what's right with our lives and focus on what's right with with the family and celebrate those things and those are the things that will grow.

1 (29m 13s):
Our mom was the first powerful Optimist in our lives and she created an art studio out of our kitchen floor. She made a lunch for three boys out of a block of brown sugar one time and it took us like a couple hours. We're out of the playground and personally I like yeah. No, no, go ahead. She's just like, you know, we're looking at each other like do we have sugar for lunch, but she you know, some of her quotes are so classic to us today. She literally said to Burton died one time in the car. I like running out of money because then I don't have to worry about what I need to buy and she just made that switch every day or shouldn't say switch.

1 (29m 55s):
She made an intentional choice and that's really what the whole brand and the whole idea and philosophy is based on that. We all have limited resources when we wake up in the morning we can decide to focus on what's wrong with us, or we can focus on what's right, so we were hoping Stronger than we ever had that this would be something that would take off because we believed in it and we felt like authentically it was us then when we got in the street and the shirts sold. So well, it was like everything came together because we just felt like we have it here. We have this this thing's got like the magic dust. We just didn't have any idea what to do with it

2 (30m 34s):
now, but I mean this was like kind of like a make-or-break moment for you, right? Because I read that like at this point you only had like a like a couple hundred bucks between you I mean is that is it true or is it or is it an exaggeration

1 (30m 50s):
not even seventy seventy eight bucks the other day that the day that we after printing the 48 Life Is Good t-shirts. We had seventy eight bucks left

2 (31m 6s):
when we come back in just a moment how Burton John grew their seventy eight bucks into D thousand dollars which grew into 1 million and then a hundred million stay with us. I'm guy rods and you're listening to how I built this from

1 (31m 22s):
NPR.

2 (31m 37s):
Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to one of our sponsors who helps make this podcast possible stack Overflow for teams building a company is hard. It's easier when your employees can quickly get answers to critical questions stack Overflow for teams helped some of the world's most Innovative companies better organize and share knowledge across their organization learn more and get three months free when you sign up its stackoverflow.com collaborate. There's more to watch and read these days than any one person can get to that's why we make pop culture happy hour from NPR twice a week.

2 (32m 17s):
We sort through the nonsense share reactions and give you the lowdown on what's worth your precious time. Listen And subscribe to NPR's pop culture happy hour. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 1994 and Jon Burge. Jacobs are getting some traction with a new t-shirt design. It's a smiling guy wearing a beret with sunglasses and just underneath the words life is good and they start to get the shirts into some small shops mainly in beach towns. The

1 (32m 54s):
first retailer was down Cape Cod. It was a little flip-flop shop and she bought two dozen shirts two weeks later. She called us up and explained to us that next to her stores and ice cream shop and she and her husband were thinking life's pretty good. When you having an ice cream as a simple pleasure, you know, she asked us does this guy Jake eat ice cream, and we said nobody will And so Jake started eating ice cream that was the second t-shirt and and the ones with the ice cream cone sold even better than the just the Jake and the next thing happened with her sister-in-law and she had a place with her boyfriend up in Vermont on the bike path.

1 (33m 41s):
And so Jake started riding a bicycle and rollerblading was big at the time and then we put a guitar in his hands and it was just, you know, we pretty quickly realized that all we had to do was walk around and ask people what do you love? You know, what the first thing Nancy that retailer said to us was guys I got to reorder and Burton our like what's a reorder and that indicates where we're at as a business after five years, but I was so excited about learning. We didn't build it for the shirts. We just sent him down.

2 (34m 17s):
So I guess that year 94 after you kind of become life is good. You did like Almost $90,000 worth of Revenue which is which is great, you know here you can start to see maybe a path towards, you know towards real profitability and then I guess the next year you really I mean, you're still running this business by the way out of your apartment in Boston that you guys share

1 (34m 44s):
right this starts to turn a corner though because we see that reaction in the street and boom we start thinking about distribution and hiring a sales rep and that summer of 95 the momentum starts

2 (35m 0s):
rolling and that was when you guys made your first hire as well, I guess

1 (35m 4s):
right. That's right. Yeah, they carry Sherman moved in upstairs from us and became a friend and we just used to beg her when she got home from work to help us pack orders and help us try to organize the orders and she was a big help. So we begged her to quit her job eventually and she did it. You could do things five times faster than us for one thing and then it became clear. We needed the help pretty badly and she needed to take a leap. Yeah, we had a friend over for dinner one night because he was pretty sharp and we asked him to tell us how much business we would have to do to be able to afford to pay carry seventeen thousand dollars, which is what she said was the minimum our question to her was like what is the lowest amount that you could possibly get paid to work with us?

1 (35m 55s):
And she said $17,000 so he did the math for us and he said that we would have to do a quarter of a million dollars in business which sounded like a billion dollars. Yeah, and we did 262. I think it was 260. Mm.

2 (36m 7s):
Yeah, and in that tuner 62,000 was like that's to pay for all of your supplies and everything and everything, right? It was not profit. That is that is no

1 (36m 17s):
no. No, those those gross revenue days. We would get prepared for die t-shirts pfft. They call it and we stored them we didn't have enough room for them in our apartment which store them in a bulkhead in the building and we had to put them in trash bags that were tightly wound up because it was moist down there and so in any given day we would get a certain amount of orders we would be designing during the daytime in the afternoon. We would take those shirts down to New Bedford get them died in the shirt collars. We wanted the next afternoon. We'd take those shirts out to a Marlboro Mass and to a screen printer called Midland Graphics screen printed T-shirts and then by four o'clock drop them off at UPS, whatever the orders were which was you know, two or three retailers a couple of orders and and then we then we set up a trailer like the back of a 18-wheeler container container like permanently stationed next to our screen printer with their permission.

1 (37m 23s):
Yeah, they had a dirt. Parking lot and 40 rent. They look as we're afraid to get the overhead of a warehouse. And so they let us it was $30 a month to rent the lease the the container and 40 dollars. They let us park it on their lot

2 (37m 42s):
because you didn't want to take the risk on unlike a long-term lease, right? So you were just like let's just use a shipping containers are Warehouse make sense.

1 (37m 48s):
Yeah, we want we wanted to make sure the revenue ran way out ahead of the stated a couple extension cords lighting and not a lot of ventilation in those containers, but we cracked summer of 95 96 and it was kind of non-stop 24/7.

2 (38m 4s):
How did you how did you get the trademark on it? I mean, it seems like a very common phrase life is good. But you got it. You got the trademark. How did that

1 (38m 12s):
happen? Well, we failed five times. We were going in the Boston Public Library at night because we couldn't afford an attorney and we sent five applications and failed and then I want one like to play basketball and some guy asked me did I see you and your brother selling T-shirts in front of the Boston Garden the other night and I said, yeah and he said how's that going not so good but we have this great idea and I went on and on about what the concept was and that we're trying to trade market and then I realized that I'd been rude and not asked the guy what he did I said, what do you do for a living? And he said I'm trademark attorney. Wow, and guy's name was Bob Pierce and I went and saw him two days later and convinced them to do the work pro bono and he knew just what to do.

1 (39m 1s):
So we had to make a lot of changes. We had to create hang tags and labels we the label in our short said Jacobs Gallery. So we switched the label to life is good. And then we had to get affidavits from five different retailers who said that it represented a brand and by definition legally a trademark denotes the source of the good So this is when you just put a mark on a t-shirt that's called ornamental, but if people look at it and say that represents the source of the goods in some way then it's a brand so he did all those things correctly and I got to tell you it's 25 years later and and Bob Pierce still gets all our intellectual property

2 (39m 45s):
business. That's amazing. So you got the trademark on this phrase life is good as a brand and that's it. I mean, you're you sort of you own this phrase and you can use it as your business.

1 (40m 1s):
Yeah, even the fact that you said it a few times during this podcast you owe us money guy. Yeah. It was a it was a big day when we got it. We still didn't really know how to run the business or what to do. But it was we knew it was a valuable thing. Yeah.

2 (40m 18s):
How did you guys divide labor between the two of you? Like who did what who did finances who did the art? Who did the deliveries? How did you guys who was in charge who was the boss is the older brother the boss

1 (40m 31s):
anything that involved brainpower pretty much fell on my side. No seriously, but bird he had more of a background coming out of school on the business side and he's a great communicator great motivator. So he worked the phones a lot. I was spending more time on the drawing table or like at the screen print shop or maybe packing up stuff but there's plenty of crossover and Burt's very creative as well. So it mixed pretty seamlessly over the

2 (41m 2s):
years. I guess. It was a turning point a pretty significant turning point in 1996. You guys get a call from a pretty big Sporting Goods chain based out of Indianapolis named named scallions or

1 (41m 16s):
Galen aliens.

2 (41m 17s):
I'm like that galleons. Yeah, what was that?

1 (41m 21s):
Yeah, they were they were actually in our opinion the best Sporting Goods in the country their stores were incredible. And yeah, they they were open to a sales call and interested in the brand so they invited us to go visit them in Indianapolis. And we actually couldn't afford to fly out. So instead we've just transparent with them and asked if we could piggyback when they came here would they come and visit us what they didn't realize was that there was no life is good and that when they came to visit us there'd be coming to our apartment. So they anyway we made them Prince spaghetti and Ragu Sauce and we hung out and they were on board and they placed the biggest orders by far that we've ever seen and they kind of put us on the map outside of New England.

1 (42m 13s):
I think Dick's Sporting Goods eventually bought galleons, right? That's right, and I Don't know if it was apparent to them that the entire company in Burt myself and Carrie were sitting with them and our kitchen at dinner. But but we did have a lot of laughs and then we got an order and that was a huge step for us to suddenly be shipping 288 pieces instead of 24 pieces to a retailer.

2 (42m 36s):
So once you get into galleons was that just like a game changer. I mean, did you see your business just like Skyrocket

1 (42m 42s):
it was a game changer because once it what happened was our most of our business then and now is specialty mom-and-pop business. So the mom and pops, we'll take a look at the big guys and try to find brand sometimes that different retailers are caring and galleons was kind of a model citizen that a lot of small retailers looked up to and so once we were in galleons, we were in all these Geographic locations and those great visibility for us. So all of a sudden our phones were ringing like crazy from other retailers from other territories and so gallons would Responsible for hundreds of new accounts over the next year or two and business really started booming.

1 (43m 24s):
You know, it went from that 250,000 to 620 that we broke a million at one point, too. Yep.

2 (43m 32s):
Was that just mind-blowing to you? It was just thinking how do we go from having like $78 between us three years ago to a million dollars in sales.

1 (43m 42s):
Yeah. It was pretty mind-blowing. My we didn't have a concept of you know, like what it meant to do a million dollars. I think we thought maybe we should retire and those wow, we hit a million dollars. I mean, I think we definitely stopped and sort of, you know, I had a beer and kind of said, wow, we know what will what just happened but on the other hand was still in our apartment and you don't really look around and see any difference. It's just a mad scramble still but but I think yeah, I think aliens and Crossing that million-dollar Mark kind of gave us the confidence to invest in a lease. Get a warehouse and and we hired a few people. We mean we didn't have a computer what we do it wait until Kerry who still works with us to this day.

1 (44m 26s):
By the way, she actually owns 5% of the business is a partner. Yeah, but she you know, she said to us you really need to get a computer and both John and I were like well know where artists we do we do we don't want a computer and they so she said well you needed to run the business and why do we need a computer? But she was right. Well, there's a lot of absurd of exchanges we had this guy who had run Champion the brand Chester and Wilson sporting goods and he was helping us out through his a sales rep we connected personally Joe Phillips. God bless him. He was flying up high Phillies like an angel. We didn't ya to get Angel / devil. Yeah the best kind and he he would give us advice and Direction and he would ask us very basic questions.

1 (45m 11s):
Like, you know, what do you got on the books for next year? We're like what? What book what do you mean anybody? How do you plan how much product to make? Going like we just we've been doubling for like the last few years. We just figure we're going to double again. He's like that's a very scary way to run a business. Yeah, he asked us what our assets were. He's trying to get us off our personal off our loans because our personal names were on the loan notes and he said we got to we got to change this. You know, what do you got for assets Bert now

2 (45m 41s):
like we get a mountain bike

1 (45m 45s):
and we were dead serious. We didn't even know how to answer the question. Like I got that picture of Mom. We got a vcr and he was just like dumbfounded looking at us like these guys are so clueless. Yeah.

2 (46m 0s):
She was fine the shirts like I because I mean when I think of life is good, I think I've liked going to Ocracoke Island, you know someplace I like Cape Cod like yeah, you know, you would life is good and it's the summer and it's easy to feel that way. Is that where the shirts were? In sold and like beach towns and places like that in the summertime. One

1 (46m 23s):
of the strengths right away was that it wasn't one distribution channel. So you're talking about destination Resort which became important to us right away. But Sporting Goods was really big to gift shops for people like, you know around themes like home themes like, you know, love family gardening grilling the back and beyond all that kind of stuff. Yeah. So it really was the distribution was really spread out which you know, we didn't really we can't take credit for strategically planning that but a helped us a lot through the years the economy has gone up and down and when you're in a single distribution channel, it's hard to whether economic downturns, but for us, you know, some would get hurt worse than others and we were always able to weather it because we were not too many eggs in one basket.

1 (47m 17s):
Yeah. There was so many different places for us to go and and when the economy went down, it would not all the channels will get impacted the same way. I mean did you

2 (47m 27s):
I mean when you think about a very simple phrase some very basic and not mean your guys are great artists. No, no, no judgment, but like very simple our work and it became this thing t-shirts and and dinner plates and and posters and things like what what what are the things? I'm probably

1 (47m 51s):
forgetting frisbees backpacks towels. I mean it really doesn't you know, it really just became you know, what is a good canvas to connect emotionally with people and in, you know, more recent years more things like video content and Publishing books Etc, which is extremely exciting to us, but we're still most known for the t-shirts. Did

2 (48m 15s):
you guys I mean you've been doing this now since Yeah, I guess since the late 80s right been selling T-shirts. Have you ever seen any part of you guys want to just sell it, you know sell it to a bigger company and just kind of cash in because you kiss you both of you become pretty well off from this tiny little t-shirt business and you can I don't know kind of do whatever you want.

1 (48m 41s):
I think the reason that we're not interested in selling or going public is what we learn from these customers that started sending us letters emails sharing their personal stories and they really taught us that optimism is most powerful in the hardest times and these are people dealing with chemotherapy losing loved ones and they'd say we all wore Life Is Good t-shirts to the memorial service for my brother because that's the spirit with which he lived and we've got thousands of those letters and emails and people Kind of opening up their whole personal lives to us because the emotional connection to the brand.

1 (49m 23s):
They're the ones who taught us this and if we hadn't received those letters that may have been appealing to us like yeah, we've been at this for a few decades, but we want to spread that message as wide as we can because it we believe in it more than anything else in the

2 (49m 38s):
world and Burt what what are your thoughts on that? I mean, did you ever consider, you know wanted to sell the

1 (49m 45s):
business? Well in a lot of ways, we really feel like we're just getting warmed up it honestly feels like a start-up today. We're like a 25 year old start-up where there's all these young people walking around that remind us of ourselves, but are much faster and stronger and smarter and I'm not operating the business. I was president and CEO for a long time and we replaced me with a woman that actually came from our nonprofit side and she's killing it and you can tell Quickly that she's about ten times the operator that I was and it's allowing me to dive back into the creative and I haven't been there in a while.

1 (50m 28s):
So we're really kind of back to where we started in the beginning. Hey, let's designed some T-shirts. But now we have a really strong balance sheet. We own a hundred percent of the business and you know, we have no intention of going public or selling the business. We just want to see you know, how far we can take this in at some point figure out what to do with the structure something creative. Maybe we do an ESOP to our staff. Maybe we even sell it to our customers something that enables the that will enable the best work of life is good to be done after Johnny and I are dead and gone. So

2 (51m 5s):
I mean, do you guys feel like you grew up with very working class home? I mean in that room upstairs with frost on the windows and like you presumably Today both of you are doing pretty well. I mean you can you can live pretty comfortably.

1 (51m 22s):
Yeah, no question about it. Yeah, just to have our own home. Seriously. Not not to be too corny, but that that's pretty cool and to be able to travel it's incredible and I don't think we would ever take that for granted

2 (51m 37s):
do your what did your I mean, what did your parents make it your business your mom. I know passed away a couple years ago and then I can see your later your dad your dad passed. What do they make of this? I mean this t-shirt business it turned into something

1 (51m 50s):
huge. Yeah, they loved it. I think they were proud of it and they really did do their part while we had our dysfunction growing up and there were times where you know, right right up until the time that our mom passed away if she saw somebody in life is good t-shirt. She'd run up to them and say my son's made that, you know, it was embarrassing when you were with her, but our dad got a kick out of the nuts and bolts of the business. He always wanted to know Details and he was so encouraging when Burton died for that year and a half when we did live at home and we're still doing the van trips. He always just you know, we'd rolling in at 3 a.m. Some night.

1 (52m 30s):
How'd you do? How'd you do? It was never what the hell? Are you guys doing like your you know, your college graduates, like get your act together. There's no pressure on Career. It was always how'd you do and that helped a lot and I think maybe the maybe the interesting thing was going full circle with our dad is that in the Autumn of his life. He he came out of that funk. He really came out of the depression and he really became the guy that we never knew that we see in those pictures, you know before we were around and it's hard to say what that we know what caused that but as our business grew that house that we grew up in really fell to pieces in our parents while we were living just like you mentioned guy better and better along the way.

1 (53m 17s):
And we'd go visit our parents living in that same house falling apart. So we decided to knock the house down and build them a nice new home. And you know, I think it was the first time in my father's life since he you know, since he had all those kids that when people came to visit they had a place to sit down and that the he could be proud of his home. And I think also where he felt like he was a failure he looked at his six kids now and you know, we landed on our feet all of us and he didn't screw everything up. So I think he was a little easier on himself and in some ways the success success of the business might help my dad.

1 (53m 59s):
You don't get over that hump and realize that if we're not failures, he wasn't a failure and it was really cool to see him relaxed and enjoying his grandkids. And yeah, it was like it was like he and my mom were dating again mean they would just like hang out and spend time and You know, they went away on some weekends and things they hadn't done that and you know 30 years. I mean it just they were married for 56 years. And then the the last ones believe it or not while it was tough with my mom's illness and everything. They had some great years. Wow. Our mom said that to just before we know once she knew the cancer was taking her life in there was nowhere to go.

1 (54m 41s):
She said nobody should feel sorry for me. I'm the happiest I've ever been in my life. You know, I'm part of that was I'm sure because my dad had come out of the funk. Yeah, and also that she knew that she did a good job with all her kids and that we're all okay, you know wow.

2 (54m 59s):
You know when you think about this crazy story going from t-shirts up and down the Eastern Seaboard to a selling out of the back of a van to knock on the dorm rooms to $78 between you

1 (55m 13s):
two, you know,

2 (55m 15s):
a shipping container is your office and and you know the company today what it does reportedly almost a hundred million dollars in Revenue a year. Is that about right? Yeah. That's all

1 (55m 25s):
right. You got about what

2 (55m 28s):
almost 200 employees today, right? Yep. It's pretty good. I mean do you foresee you bird to you when you think about the success of this company? Do you attribute it to your hard work and your brother's hard work or in your intelligence or do you think that some of it came from just luck

1 (55m 45s):
a lot of luck? I think we stumbled into something that's much bigger than we are. I think we've been resilient, you know, maybe more resilient than smart, but it's a good good 50% lock. Right place right time to percent skill and then we've worked our asses off. So that's that's played a big factor to so, you know, maybe there's all those parts are equal and John how much of

2 (56m 13s):
it because of like how much because of your hard work and your skill and intelligence.

1 (56m 18s):
I would say skill and intelligence maybe 20% hard work another 20 and then brute strength maybe from me 20. So neither. I mean really that you got your answer there in that neither of us know how to add up to a hundred percent. Yeah. And yeah, we just you know, so tell definitely not

2 (56m 42s):
skill a lot of luck. That's can't do math. So clearly there was a lot of luck no

1 (56m 46s):
question.

2 (56m 49s):
That's John and Bert Jacobs cofounders of the life is good company, by the way, we know for a fact that at least one of their t-shirts has traveled all the way to space and 2013 astronaut Karen nyberg posted a video from the International Space Station and she was showing how she washed her hair in zero gravity and the shirt that she's wearing in that video. It's from life is good. It's a vague grinning girl who looks a lot like the original Jake sitting back to back with her dog and underneath it says Lean On Me. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick thanks to our 2019 lead sponsor of how I built this campaign monitor the radically easy solution to email marketing 80 percent of retail professionals indicate email marketing as the highest driver of customer retention.

2 (57m 46s):
Try it for free @ campaign monitor.com. What do all of these people have in common Kamala Harris Pete Buddha judge and Bernie Sanders, they're all running for president and they all sat down with us on the NPR politics podcast when people is gonna drive me completely crazy. We are going out on the trail with as many of the Democratic presidential candidates as we can and to bringing you in-depth interviews with them come along by subscribing to the NPR politics podcast. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and our story today starts with Jim Malone who like a lot of people used to go bowling from time to time when he was growing up but these days

1 (58m 33s):
no, I think I was probably average as a kid and I'm probably horrendous as an

2 (58m 37s):
adult but the Great American Pastime of bowling kind of found its way back to Jim about 12 years ago. He was looking to build a new table for his apartment and he was poking around a store full of reclaimed wood in Upstate New York and a guy there said, hey, if you need a good deal, I think I've got something for you and he brought it down. It was it

1 (58m 57s):
didn't look like much it just looked kind of like a piece of Dusty old really thick wood. The

2 (59m 4s):
wood was actually part of an old bowling lane made from the hardest and strongest part of a pine tree. It doesn't have not sent it's like this

1 (59m 12s):
beautiful long straight grain and I did notice that right away, and I also thought that if it worked it would be a great story. Tell friends when they came

2 (59m 21s):
over. So Jim hauled this nine-foot slab of bowling lane on to his truck drove it home got to work.

1 (59m 29s):
I had to really just go at it with a sander and planar and but by the time I got in the kitchen, it was stunning just this golden. It just looked

2 (59m 39s):
beautiful in the story might have ended there except right around the same time. Jim lost his job and animation studio and a friend of his who love the table. He made suggested that maybe he could make more pieces of furniture and sell them at the flea market in Brooklyn. So Jim thought about it and he said sure and he set up a

1 (59m 60s):
booth I had, you know, people just

2 (1h 0m 2s):
stop and love the

1 (1h 0m 4s):
furniture and say nothing but nice things and I gave out lots of cards, but the sales were not

2 (1h 0m 10s):
huge but one day Jim got a break a designer from Starbucks stopped by his booth and said, you know this bowling lane Furniture really kind of It's with the aesthetic of our stores. Maybe you could make a few tables for us. So Jim gave her his card

1 (1h 0m 27s):
when you're just starting out you you cling to every positive indicator, you know, so I thought this is great. Finally, you know, something's happening and it would be

2 (1h 0m 37s):
amazing. But just when he finally started to get some traction, I didn't hear from her for for like four months four months was excruciating and to make matters even more stressful. Jim had just gotten

1 (1h 0m 52s):
married. It was a financial strain. I mean there was no money coming in. So it really was the 11th hour and I was kind of like if something doesn't happen pretty soon. I'm going to be throwing in the towel,

2 (1h 1m 3s):
but finally after those four nail-biting months the woman from Starbucks did get back to Jim and she ordered a big communal table for the store in Brooklyn and soon after that another designer from sweet green ordered tables and chairs for two restaurants in the Area I was happy to get the order

1 (1h 1m 22s):
but most things were a request for

2 (1h 1m 24s):
something that I hadn't yet done. So now A Familiar entrepreneurs dilemma. Jim had to scramble to deliver unto orders. He hired a few other people and started scaling up production of bowling alley furniture at a small facility in Brooklyn and fortunately for him since a lot of bowling alleys across the country of closed down. There was no shortage of wood. It went from literally

1 (1h 1m 51s):
being thrown in the dumps to every year we get hundreds of bowling lanes, you know, it was the free market springing to

2 (1h 1m 60s):
life today about 10 years after starting out at that first flea market. Jim just opened his first storefront in Brooklyn and he's placed his furniture in a number of fast casual restaurants. His biggest client Shake Shack is using Jim's Furniture in over a hundred locations and you never know who's gonna walk into one of those places. Says I actually have a picture of Obama eating at one of the Shake Shack

1 (1h 2m 24s):
tables. It's actually hanging in our store. I think Biden sitting next to them to

2 (1h 2m 30s):
Jim's company is called counter evern ature short for counter-revolution. You down makes Furniture full time with 16 employees and is revenue is in the low millions of dollars. If you want to find out more about counter EV or your previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to our show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcast. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or at guy Roz our show is produced this week by Rachel Falkner with music composed by rumty narrow Bluey.

2 (1h 3m 18s):
Thanks also to Julia carnies. And as Mexican porn evil Grant and Jeff Rogers, our intern is David. Jaw. I'm guy Roz. You've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.