3 (0s):
Hey there, it's guy here and really quick before we start this brand-new episode of the show how I built this isn't just a podcast but also a book A book filled with stories and lessons from some of the world's greatest entrepreneurs about the gift of failure the beauty of ideas and the path to building something meaningful. You can pre-order the book right now wherever you get your books or by visiting Kyra's.com.

4 (31s):
We didn't find there wasn't a partner that we had met that really understood the business and actually one of the meetings the guys fell asleep on us. We're presenting to them classy. Yeah classy and he was trying to like act like he wasn't sleeping and and we noticed right away and we're like really we spent a lot of time presenting and and we're very passionate about our ideas. And then someone's falling asleep that didn't really bode well with us.

2 (1m 3s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today how to friends looked at a mountain of dirty laundry and saw a hole in the market and how that turned into the laundress a line of detergents. They sold

3 (1m 25s):
for a reported 100 million

1 (1m 28s):
dollars.

3 (1m 33s):
A lot of people ask me to name the single thing that most entrepreneurs have in common. There's resilience the ability to withstand rejection unshakable optimism, you get my drift but a much much simpler example is that most of them before they started had day jobs a desk a phone a boss co-workers and in a lot of cases That day job was what inspired the business that they would come to be known for Sadie Lincoln worked at 24 Hour Fitness for nearly a decade before she left to start her own Fitness brand are three Alex blumberg was a public radio producer for nearly 15 years before he left to found his own podcast company.

3 (2m 22s):
Gimlet Janice Brian Howard got a job temping as a secretary in ela in the late 1970s and really started her own Employment Agency called act one for Lindsay Boyd. It was a marketing job in fashion first for Brooks Brothers. And then for Chanel that inspired her business, but not a fashion brand even though as you will hear she did briefly have her own line of t-shirts, but instead Lindsey's work in the fashion industry exposed her to a jaw-dropping amount of dry cleaning. This was in the early 2000s and it occurred to her that many

2 (3m 0s):
Of the solvents and chemicals used in dry cleaning

3 (3m 4s):
were really bad for those delicate outfits. And that's where she thought there might be an opportunity. So for two years she and her college friend Gwen Whiting dove into the science of dirty laundry a quest that would lead them to develop a line of eco-friendly detergents that would eliminate the need to go to the dry cleaner and in 2004. They launched the

2 (3m 28s):
laundress a brand that now Sells dozens of laundry products and accessories. It has stores and

4 (3m 34s):
customers around the world. But for the first

3 (3m 37s):
six years as you will hear they struggled to make a profit and even to keep the business afloat. They eventually did of course and in 2019, the laundress was purchased by Unilever reportedly for 100 million dollars, but lot before she became an Eco cleaning Mogul Lindsay thought about becoming a biologist. She grew up in New York's Hudson Valley and when it came time for college, she decided to major in Marine Biology at the College of Charleston in

4 (4m 9s):
South Carolina, but I realized that while I love science, it wasn't really the ultimate thing for me. I couldn't see myself doing that as a career and very beginning of my sophomore year. I said this is not I can't stay here. You know, this is not for me. I was taking extra curriculum activities at night and Fashion and then my childhood friend was at Cornell University at the textile program. And she said you should you should come here. You should look at this program. It's you would love it. So I went to visit her and that was it. I mean I fell in love with the program I fell in love with the school and I had the grades and I got in

3 (4m 53s):
so you you went to Cornell to study textiles exactly. What were you learning? Were you learning about the business? Enos of of apparel or the science of textiles or both both.

4 (5m 7s):
Yeah, we were learning about we were in a lab burning different fibers and finding out what the reaction was and different chemicals and understanding the chemical makeup of what cellulose has and cotton fibers and really the Technic the the scientific side of it. And then the other courses were around retail math. And how to you know, for more of a business side of it. I also did an independent study and color theory and then art history and sort of fashion history to so understanding Trends and forecasting. So it was a it was a mix of everything that you would need to know to set yourself up.

4 (5m 50s):
If you know, if you want to go into more of the

2 (5m 52s):
scientific side of it or the business side or

3 (5m 54s):
design and when you were at College, I guess you met a person would eventually Who will eventually feature in The Story Goes when waiting she was also in the program studying studying apparel and textiles exactly exactly. She was

4 (6m 11s):
majoring in the design side

3 (6m 12s):
of it. And will you like in the same dorm or you just kind of met and became

4 (6m 17s):
friends? Yeah, actually, I'm the childhood friend. I was speaking about before she was friends with her with Gwen so that at that point we became friends and met and then and that was it. I mean, there was no talk about doing a

3 (6m 29s):
business in college. Are ya anything of that nature? No, and I should mention we're going to hear about Gwen a little later on but but after college, I guess you and often like it did a bunch of different things. And what what was your first job out of

4 (6m 43s):
college. My first job was at Brooks Brothers, right? I was in product development and them in the high-end men's division. I like being Hands-On, so I got to meet with the seamstress and then talk about textiles and I got to go to all of the fabric mills and then price The Collection. It was a lie so much fun. I had the best time

3 (7m 9s):
so you were Brooks Brothers for about two years, I guess and and you get a job with Chanel. Yes Chanel and no introduction

2 (7m 18s):
needed. Yeah.

3 (7m 20s):
Did they did you apply for it to they did they recruit you?

4 (7m 22s):
I found an ad in women's wear daily. Wow. I think it's like one of the few times they put an ad in and I read that. That was my paper. And I didn't know anyone there. I just sent in my resume and called them and called them and called them and then I got the job

2 (7m 40s):
as a as what

4 (7m 42s):
as a junior account executive

3 (7m 45s):
in ready-to-wear and in working in New York City. Yes working in New York

4 (7m 49s):
City on Fifth Avenue above the

2 (7m 51s):
boutique. This is going to be a super dumb question. I'm super embarrassed to ask this because

3 (7m 55s):
like I've been you know in media and journalism for more than 23 years. But I did not realize until I was doing prep for this interview. I'm so I'm just gonna say this out right and be transparent with everyone listening. I just thought Chanel made bags and perfumes and sunglasses it close. That's okay. I'm

2 (8m 13s):
sure you're not the only one you're not the only like

3 (8m 16s):
coats and dresses. I

2 (8m 17s):
mean, yeah, you define expensive very expensive

3 (8m 20s):
stuff. Yes. And what does it mean to be a junior account executive and sales at Chanel? What do you actually do?

4 (8m 26s):
So what we did was we did a ton of of trunk shows and what trunk shows are are you basically schlep around a trunk of samples to different department stores and meet with customers that are coming to that store and you sell the collection based on samples you do pre-orders. So we did a ton of traveling. I think I was in a different place probably every two weeks doing that and

3 (8m 52s):
you would show up with a trunk full of different sizes of different apparel and whoever showed up could buy them and maybe get like a A deal on it. Well,

4 (9m 2s):
not exactly so we would show up with one size of the sample. It was a sample in a sample represented the size of the model wore during the runway show or you know, the the show in which it was represented in France. So we would set up a rack of clothing and then we take orders and that was a big majority of what I did. So I had a lot of interaction with customers. I really enjoyed that and we went to France we got to go to all of the fashion

3 (9m 38s):
shows. Whoo.

4 (9m 39s):
Yeah. It was a lot of fun.

3 (9m 41s):
So pretty cool life and learning about this kind of brand and I've read that like, you know, you're doing this job as Chanel and you're kind of focused on it, but you still you had like little side assholes like you you have like a couple little businesses like a hatbox

2 (9m 58s):
business. And and then you start

4 (10m 0s):
a t-shirt brand like

3 (10m 2s):
what is what tell me about that had what was that? So

4 (10m 6s):
I always had businesses on the side. I like to paint and my mom had bought these boxes. They were cardboard recycle boxes and they were kind of they were called hat

3 (10m 18s):
boxes, but I use them as storage boxes and I

4 (10m 21s):
was painting them and friends of mine were saying they wanted them and I thought oh I should sell them and so I did my own I created my own website. I learned HTML like kind of website building for dummies. I bought the website domain sassy storage.com and started selling them online out of my apartment and I did that for a little while and then I realized I didn't really know what I was doing. So I moved on the

3 (10m 49s):
head books of business was

2 (10m 50s):
booming had Fox Business is not

3 (10m 52s):
booming. No got it. All right. So, you

2 (10m 55s):
know that this is not sassy storage was not gonna be the same. No, it's not moving the needle for me unless

3 (11m 1s):
unless you had the royal family as your as your customers. That is correct

4 (11m 5s):
hats I had to move to the

3 (11m 7s):
UK. So what so what was the next business you came up with?

4 (11m 12s):
So a friend of mine we were tied on it was t-shirt business called Jessica Lindsay. Her name is Jessica. Obviously, the other part is is

3 (11m 21s):
pretty obvious Lindsey.

4 (11m 23s):
Yes, and we were making tie-dye t-shirts. We're just tie-dying t-shirts and And people want to know where the T-shirt came from and we're like we made them in our

3 (11m 32s):
bathroom. And but were they just like tie-dyed t-shirts that many of us lives. They were Hanes tank tops just Hanes t-shirt. So you just you took number bands and Tide doesn't like we did learn to Camp. Yeah, we were kids. Yeah. Well, how did what was it? What was so special about them?

4 (11m 46s):
We we had a embellishment like a I'm blanking on the name of what it's called. We had a machine like a grommet

3 (11m 56s):
machine. Oh and you could put like gems and

4 (11m 59s):
We were putting studs. Yes. We were doing

2 (12m 1s):
rhinestones and studs around the collar. Okay to add a little be document because that has a length at Ya again. Okay, I love that. So we yeah,

4 (12m 14s):
so that was that was the Bane differentiator from the regular hands tie-dye

3 (12m 19s):
t-shirts, right? This is like the summer in the summer time of like 2000

2 (12m 25s):
2001 2002 and 2004.

3 (12m 27s):
Were you selling the shirts for bye. The way it

2 (12m 29s):
depend on who we're selling it to but but to ultimately Saks Fifth Avenue and Henry bundles bought them and they

3 (12m 35s):
wait sorry wait people are asking but you're tied I sure could you mean your bathroom then you're selling them to Saks Fifth Avenue. NE and Henri Bendel. There must be something that happened in between. Absolutely.

4 (12m 47s):
We I think we were selling that we are selling them for basically nothing. You know, we were based we were selling them for like 25

2 (12m 53s):
dollars or something to

4 (12m 54s):
friends and and people that wanted them because it wasn't really about that for us.

2 (12m 59s):
Right. I'm in some

4 (13m 0s):
petty cash but not yeah, we weren't quitting our day jobs. Let's put it that way. We saw this demand me being in sales and she was also she was actually an edit in magazine working for magazine. So

2 (13m 15s):
we as your friend

4 (13m 16s):
Jessica. Yeah, and we actually we have an article that time out magazine did on our t-shirts that she helped secure that yeah, and we saw the trend in the temporary floors where people were this is when James Pierce t-shirts were coming out and hundred dollar t-shirts were bit more popular. So we called on a few boutiques where we knew

3 (13m 40s):
people and how many would they buy like when you went to these buyers but they say you will order a hundred or 50 or I mean you were still making them with grommet a grand machine in your

4 (13m 49s):
apartment. Yes, and in the basement of my friend's apartment, we were grommet in my hands had like blisters on them from pressing the machine. And did they ask

3 (13m 60s):
you because you were doing the day job and you were working on this on the weekend? I guess it did they ask you like I'm just trying to put myself in the shoes of the sax buyer. They would they like so tell me a little bit about your supply chain or you know, where you get your teacher. Nothing. Nothing nothing. They were like great. We'll take 50. Yes and what and what are they price them

4 (14m 18s):
at? They price them around $80. Yeah, and we shifted our quality from Haines to American

3 (14m 26s):
Apparel. Yeah,

4 (14m 27s):
so we were Buying them at wholesale in the Garment District and downtown and just buying them by the bundles and we didn't have any space for the boxes

3 (14m 37s):
that came first sacks order that was like

4 (14m 39s):
550 shirts or someone saying I'm out. Wow, and we kind of looked around and we're like, wow, we're really

2 (14m 47s):
in over our head here is a real business and these this is called Jessica Lindsay the brand

4 (14m 53s):
right? Yes, Jessica Lindsey.

3 (14m 55s):
Yes, I mean when you were working at Chanel Is it an account executive we're other by the people your colleagues have been like Lindsay. I was just at Saks. I saw your t-shirts. It's so cool that you're selling to

4 (15m 8s):
Saks. Well, it was something that I was very open about doing on my free time and nothing that anyone ever questioned because we worked our butts off at Chanel so it wasn't as if you know, it was literally weekends. That was it and that's something Thing that I obviously parlays really well into the laundress because we knew that you know, you have to work in your free time whenever you can to make it happen.

3 (15m 38s):
All right here in okay, so you've got this successful brand selling it some big names. I mean sacks been Del. I'm thinking if I'm you at that time. I'm thinking this is big. This has huge potential. This is going to be a huge brand. Why doesn't Jessica Lindsay exist anymore today what

4 (15m 55s):
happened? You know, it was one of those Things where you need a lot of financing for fashion and it wasn't something that it was well something we loved and knew it wasn't ultimately something that we were able to take to the next

3 (16m 13s):
step. So you just kind of just kind of fizzled out it wasn't because if I'm hanging out with you at that time, I would hope I would say Lindsey this is amazing. Like you can

4 (16m 23s):
really you've

3 (16m 24s):
already done a lot of hard stuff, but actually that's not true because the hard stuff is taking it to scale and really building it out because you

2 (16m 32s):
financing and yep,

4 (16m 34s):
it'll and infrastructure and we were we were really loose about how we were doing the business at the time it was you know, it was a hobby and then it became before we knew it we had these sacks. It was almost like a challenge. I don't you know, I think timing is really important and the timing just wasn't right. I'm assuming

3 (16m 58s):
And really make a whole lot of money out of it in the end. Not at

4 (17m 0s):
all. No, did you it's I mean this to

3 (17m 4s):
me seems like a really cool experience, right and so many ways because in some ways it showed you that you could actually start something and gain some traction.

4 (17m 15s):
Absolutely. I knew that no matter what I do. I'm going to do it a hundred percent so that that definitely helped gain confidence that definitely solidified that I needed. To do something on my own especially when my career in fashion was like this

2 (17m 33s):
industry that I was in was so specific High fashion

4 (17m 38s):
couture fashion very few jobs available. So I looked around and thought my boss isn't going anywhere. My boss's boss isn't going anywhere and these are coveted jobs. And there's no reason why they would go anywhere and there was no place for me to go like I had

2 (17m 58s):
The I was

4 (17m 59s):
a I was managing my department and I had sort of like the highest role that I could possibly have there without taking someone else's job and I just I wanted more I wasn't

3 (18m 13s):
satisfied. Yeah meantime, I'm your friend Gwen Whiting that you mean college. Is she living in New York to at the

4 (18m 20s):
time she was in London and then she ultimately came back to the city to work for Ralph

3 (18m 24s):
Lauren got it and we guys hanging out all the

4 (18m 27s):
time and And so did you start to think I mean, when did you start to think first not about the

3 (18m 32s):
business you would eventually do but just about maybe maybe maybe starting a business. What do you remember what what some of the ideas you had in your mind?

4 (18m 40s):
Yeah. I mean wine and I both wanted to start a business together. And so that's when we started getting we started thinking together and coming up with ideas of what to do. We had a fashion brand idea, but then we kind of you know fashion is tough because it's tough. To chase the trends. It's tough to you need a lot of capital for production and we put that aside we thought you know what we like fashion, but I don't think that this is you know, this is this is not the idea. This is not the long-term thing for us and then we looked into Beauty and we had a beauty idea we went we actually went to manufacturers

2 (19m 20s):
and like lotions or Cosmetics

4 (19m 22s):
Cosmetics Cosmetics lipstick and blush and things like that and Had some samples made we met with manufacturers we came up with colors

3 (19m 33s):
and you really kind of grinding through different

4 (19m 36s):
ideas. Yeah, I mean it was fun for us, you know, and I think

3 (19m 41s):
that when was by the way living in New York by the

4 (19m 43s):
she was in New York, we are actually at one point we were squatting together in our friend's apartment and watching reruns of Seinfeld every night with like this horrible tacky poster on one. One piece of artwork was a poster on our wall. I remember we put sweaters in our oven like we were you know typical 20-something with not a lot of money in an apartment in New York City. What was the

2 (20m 9s):
poster it was of this

4 (20m 12s):
Olympic skier. It was an Olympic skier. Yeah, we got it free, but

3 (20m 18s):
it sounds to me that black both of you had a real design aesthetic like we couldn't we could maybe design something. That's really great. Really nice.

4 (20m 26s):
Yeah, we were both very creative. and both working at very strong Brands which obviously had an impact on our brand and we ultimately came up with a laundress out of a need and avoid that we saw like a need that we had and avoid we saw in the market the concept of doing laundry was nothing that I ever thought I would get into but the the concept of the brand and the product ultimately

2 (20m 56s):
made a lot of sense, but that

3 (20m 58s):
idea Come to you like why you guys are kind of grinding through maybe a fan apparel brand maybe like a fashion brand maybe cosmetics. How did this idea of coming up with detergents or lot? You know laundry's clinical it was that your first idea to come up with detergents or was it to actually have like a Lego

4 (21m 18s):
store? Yeah. The first idea was a service brick and mortar store at the time. I was spending a ton of money on my dry cleaning. I'm Gwen was taking the train. Range in New Jersey to do her laundry at her mom's house because we didn't trust anyone to do the laundry. You know, we had to do it ourselves. I was hand-washing in

3 (21m 39s):
my sink. And by the way, I'm assuming you got really good deals on Chanel apparel and she got really good deals on Ralph Lauren the Pharaoh. So that's

2 (21m 47s):
you have a lot of fancy

4 (21m 49s):
stuff a lot of really nice stuff. Actually. We were spending more to clean the items and on the actual items ho it sounds Crazy, but it was in fact at the time their Sample Sales were insane. They were incredible and then really just an hand-washing even in college. I was hand-washing but washing with baby shampoo and anything super gentle. I didn't like I didn't like anything that was in the market and I knew because of my textile experience that I didn't have to you know, I didn't have to dry clean silk is washable cashmere is washable. Really? Yeah and Gwen had had this incredible experience in London washing a cashmere sweater or someone had washed a cashmere service a cashmere Washing Service.

4 (22m 38s):
And so that was sort of like the Tipping Point of oh, well we a service is a great idea, but we don't what do we know about service? We know nothing about service. We know product we know how to sell product and we know about how to create a brand. And so that was when we saw the wheel started going, you know, kind of okay, let's let's we need a product. We

3 (23m 6s):
need like a you know, a product that works like a

4 (23m 8s):
baby shampoo something that's gentle basically sounds like you

3 (23m 11s):
were you thinking of a kind of a service a dry cleaning service, but not a laundry / dry cleaning service for delicate clothing that would use very gentle Clint cleaners for people, but then you thought and this is going to be too too hard to do because opening a brick and mortar. Mortar store New York in 2002, I guess was already pretty hard and expensive for the vast majority of people

4 (23m 36s):
way too expensive. So we kind of we ask the hard questions of like what are we doing? We don't have any money and and leaving our jobs was not not an option. We had to Moonlight for two years. We weren't, you know independently wealthy kids like we were our parents were like keep your you know, are you when we ultimately left our jobs they thought Or you know,

3 (23m 59s):
we're crazy, but we'll get there. But in in 2002 when you guys sort of sat down said we let's just focus on like how did you focus on instead of having a store focusing on cleaning products? Do you remember how you got to that that decision?

4 (24m 15s):
Well, we went away from the service quickly when we realized that we didn't have the infrastructure. We visited a local dry cleaner a green cleaners where we took a tour of of their facilities and we are trying to partner with them and it just was way over our heads and at the time we were trapped both of us were traveling a lot for our jobs and I would my first stop would be the local pharmacies the local grocery stores to find out what products and sense that they had that we didn't have and Gwen had that same passion. We would buy detergents not just detergents but deodorants and baby cologne and fragrances and products.

4 (24m 58s):
All over the world when we were travel and we were noticing these different Trends and and things that and found products that were for delicates that we didn't have in the u.s. That we were using and testing on our Chanel items and on our cashmere. All right, so you so

3 (25m 17s):
you settle on let's make a product that people can use at home. Yeah. Okay, and it sounds like you have you had experiences doing it yourselves, but I imagine In if you really going to do this and jump into this you had to do some significant research because we're talking about science. I mean, it's right that I mean, there's there's fibers and different textiles and there's different

2 (25m 40s):
things that Michaels chemicals that react differently.

3 (25m 42s):
So where was your first stop? Who'd I mean, where did you go? Who'd you call? Who's you go see? What would you because this is also kind of pre in our is that pre internet? But the internet wasn't really what it is now

4 (25m 52s):
2002 absolute. So, where did you go? So we contacted art. We went back to our school. Um to Cornell for now and but for our first before we actually physically went there we contacted a professor. She was an associate Dean at the time and one of our she was never our professor, but she was a professor in detergency. And again, we knew these resources that Cornell had right that they had the

3 (26m 19s):
professor and what and detergent

4 (26m 20s):
urgency. Yes. There's a science

2 (26m 23s):
of detergent her face is a professor at

3 (26m 26s):
Cornell. Yeah. Who's Professor of detergency, that's incredible and you went to this professor. And you said what

4 (26m 33s):
we well we sent her an email and asked her told her we had an idea and we wanted to talk to her about creating detergents. We called it fabric care and she was over the moon wrote us back immediately and said absolutely let me know when you want to meet and so we quickly scheduled our I'm we spent a weekend up in Ithaca when we arrived into her office. We well we arrived with two huge bags of detergents again back to that collection of detergents that we had been buying over many years of during our

2 (27m 14s):
travels.

4 (27m 16s):
So from bleach and detergent from Argentina from France from Greece and some American brands and things that we had collected and we liked or things. Things that we were questioning because we didn't know what the

3 (27m 31s):
ingredients that we didn't know what that

4 (27m 33s):
meant and

2 (27m 36s):
she had on her table in her

4 (27m 38s):
office books stacked so high and sticky notes coming out of the books and she said where do you want to begin

2 (27m 48s):
and Gwen and I looked at each other like

4 (27m 50s):
oh my goodness. This is did. We

2 (27m 53s):
really sign up for

4 (27m 54s):
this. What was the name of this professor again K Open Door?

3 (27m 59s):
So you started to do some research on what would work best and what did you start to discover

4 (28m 3s):
we discovered that we would spend a ton of time at Kinkos making

2 (28m 8s):
copies right of all these textbooks of all the textbooks and

4 (28m 12s):
and Gwen and I split them up and we had highlighters and we highlighted all of the pertinent information and or what we thought would be important to educate ourselves on molecular structures and what happens when a fiber hits

2 (28m 27s):
bleach. These are like so like this is like the herald tacky fun food and science. This

3 (28m 32s):
is like this reminds me by the way of Ken Grossman who started Sierra Nevada. He went to the library Chico State and just kind of buried himself in the science of beer brewing you really like these were like academic papers with like models and equations and stuff like that, right? Yeah.

4 (28m 48s):
Wow. Yeah The Chemical Society books that come out every year. I mean those were reading we were waiting ma'am.

2 (28m 57s):
We loved it though.

4 (28m 58s):
It's a really interesting. We we wanted we didn't want to go to a manufacturer on just say make something for us. Yeah, I wanted to know what we were making and I think that's what's woven into the whole business is that we wanted to make sure we were in control of what we were making.

3 (29m 14s):
So let's for a moment talk about when you say delegates like clothing that people dry clean were we talking were talking about cashmere silk? What else we talking about?

4 (29m 25s):
So it's silk Cashmere woolens. Silk Blends things that I mean a lot of people obviously dry clean suits. I don't things with heavy construction, like evening gowns

3 (29m 37s):
things like that can just throw in the wash. Exactly. And by the way, what is the problem with dry cleaning? I mean does it destroy it? Does it did it destroy close? I mean besides the expanse. I mean, what was your argument for, you know, direct your stuff being better than dry

4 (29m 53s):
cleaning. Yeah. So ultimately the chemicals in dry cleaning are not great for You for the environment or for the clothing, especially the clothing it time it leaves. It's not even really cleaning it. It's a solution that will take care of stains and it cleans it but it's not really taking out odor. So it's not fronting and it's not properly preserving the fiber. So ultimately front for an example is when your dry cleaning a sweater versus washing it the dry cleaner will strip. All the natural oils of the yarn. Whereas washing it will bring out all the natural oils and keep it nice and fluffy and soft and the reason why we love cashmere.

4 (30m 38s):
So those were thing and even with a silk fabric wasn't really the best way to ultimately preserve and it degrades fabric over time over

3 (30m 47s):
time. And so you were and you were taking your trying to figure out how different chemicals affect different

4 (30m 56s):
materials. We were trying to figure out

2 (30m 58s):
Why

4 (30m 58s):
the industry looked the way it did and and understand why certain chemicals and things were in the product and if we really needed it or not and all at the same time trying to find Alternatives that would be safe to wash these things it

3 (31m 13s):
always that people always think they have to dry clean.

4 (31m 16s):
One of the main things for us is that we were questioning everything that the industry was doing. So we were wondering like why is everything blue is that? Official to it.

2 (31m 29s):
The color was blue why of the

4 (31m 31s):
yeah the color of the detergents blue and we wanted to know why

3 (31m 35s):
turns out there isn't a reason

4 (31m 37s):
why it goes back to bluing. Well, it goes back to people's perception of bluing agents. And that ultimately is a Whitener,

2 (31m 45s):
right? Yeah, so that's a very

4 (31m 48s):
old thinking but it's something that struck in the industry and it's still that way today. And so that helped us eliminate a lot of the things that were in the products of time when

3 (31m 58s):
Started to kind of come across things that might work and clean in terms of cleaning. What kind

4 (32m 5s):
of what

2 (32m 6s):
kind of ingredients did you come across?

4 (32m 8s):
So enzymes enzymes were the real and still are the differentiator for us the the products that work had enzymes and ultimately the ones that had more

2 (32m 22s):
enzymes worked better because they bring down the that sustains it breaks down the stains. Yes.

4 (32m 28s):
Exactly and what we did or what we do is we have we have more enzymes and a higher concentration of them. Where do you what do you

3 (32m 37s):
mean I'm assuming you both of you you and coin decide we gotta make some of this like the guys who started method so made it in their apartment in San Francisco. You gotta like make it I think where did you get the raw materials to kind of mix and mix your potions?

4 (32m 49s):
We went to a cot. We went to a manufacturing show where they have contract manufacturers, right? We wanted a concentrated product. Less water no color. We didn't want any you know additives. We wanted as a plant-based no petroleum. And so we kind of we identified all of those key things and then we were

2 (33m 11s):
able to come up with sort of the real recipe and formula

4 (33m 15s):
to make everything not blow up

2 (33m 17s):
or you're not that we weren't we weren't doing science

4 (33m 19s):
projects in our kitchen

3 (33m 20s):
meantime, you are both

2 (33m 22s):
still doing your day jobs.

3 (33m 23s):
Yes, how are you financing? I mean you go to a you want

2 (33m 27s):
to get like a company manufacturer to

3 (33m 30s):
make you samples of what this could be. How are you paying for

2 (33m 34s):
it? So initial initial kind of

4 (33m 37s):
crowd funding before that was a thing we through what we call the Soap Splash and that was something it was a for-profit party where we invited all of our friends and family and past boyfriends and current boyfriend's and anyone that would show up. We we would say we serve them wine and alright.

2 (33m 58s):
Yeah, and

4 (33m 60s):
we took donations of the door when we made all these really cute little cutouts of laundry hanging from a line and and talked about we didn't even have product at the time. We just kind of spoke about it

3 (34m 11s):
and how much Timber like how much money did you

4 (34m 13s):
$10,000? So these were not

3 (34m 15s):
investors. It's just people helping out. This is just

4 (34m 18s):
people helping out and then ultimately we were able to secure an SBA loan of $100,000. How are you able to do that? That we were able to do that through. Well, we had really good credit and we also had our 401ks from our from

2 (34m 36s):
our job.

4 (34m 37s):
So we were able to leverage. Yes that which was really a blessing for us. We also scary because

2 (34m 49s):
it is probably relaxing outputting an absolutely bucks

3 (34m 52s):
a year as a young person and you would maybe getting a match from your bit your company and Putting that on line basically get this little put it we put everything on the

4 (35m 1s):
line. We you personally guarantee for everything and that was obviously a risk,

3 (35m 7s):
but you know,

4 (35m 9s):
we weren't scared of that. We were we were so convinced that our idea was a homerun and I think but that's because it took two years of research and development before we actually left our jobs though. So that was like we wanted some security like we were risky but But it was more it was a

2 (35m 29s):
calculated risk a little

3 (35m 30s):
bit and and when people asked you in here like once you tell me a little bit about the business that you're doing, what would you say? Well, we were just we want to basically we're making products that will kind of allow you to avoid the dry cleaner to just do yourself.

4 (35m 42s):
Yeah, we the initial elevator pitch if you will was that we were creating products that you could use for your everyday laundry. But but most importantly for things that you think you have to dry clean and that was initially the conversation we had on You know everyone wanted to know the price point and the price point was would was mind-blowing to people and and most most people

3 (36m 6s):
thought we were crazy because because why what was the price point you had in mind

2 (36m 11s):
$20? Wait, how are you father of tied? Like like four five x height isn't

4 (36m 17s):
exactly. Yeah,

2 (36m 18s):
depending on the size, but around that ran you were charging 20

3 (36m 21s):
bucks 20, some people are like what your nuts

4 (36m 25s):
nuts who wants laundry who want who wants that is laundry detergent. You know, what are you

2 (36m 31s):
who needs that that's fat doesn't make any sense that'll never

4 (36m 35s):
do anything. People aren't going to invest in that and you know, there were definitely times where we're like man we're never going to get any financing or we're never going to get it and you know, how are we going to do this? Because people are just not buying our idea.

2 (36m 52s):
When we come back in just a moment Hal Lindsey and when managed to launch that idea despite the doubters and how they would spend the next five years leapfrogging from One credit card to the next just to keep the business from going under stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. support for NPR in the following message comes from our 2020 how I built this lead sponsor Comcast business will Tom's co-founder of a space for creatives called wreck explains why they chose Comcast business and how having fast reliable internet will help their business grow Comcast business in the internet that they provided us has really made it possible for us to prove that our business model works and our Visions to have 30

3 (37m 48s):
locations across the world in

2 (37m 50s):
10 years and having I will internet is a key piece of it all learn more at Comcast business.com Comcast business Beyond fast. Thanks also to talk space lately. It seems there's something new to Grapple with every day. So it's important to get support to keep moving forward talk space online therapy matches you with an experienced licensed therapist right from your phone or computer for the

4 (38m 18s):
price of one in-person therapy session you

2 (38m 21s):
can measure Message your therapist 24/7 and here back five days a week visit talk space.com or download the app today and get $100 off your first month with promo code built. Thanks. Also to Squarespace take your great idea and build a website with professionally designed templates visit squarespace.com and use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

4 (38m 54s):
A Minneapolis business owners daughter is called out publicly for racist anti-black tweets fighting to save his business and trying to make amends. He calls on a prominent black Muslim leader for help.

2 (39m 8s):
He's an Arab Muslim and I said brother like I'm here today. Tell me what to do

4 (39m 13s):
here. What happens next listen to code switch from NPR?

3 (39m 21s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2004 and Lindsay and Gwen have just cobbled together about $100,000 to launch their first detergent products. And that money comes from all kinds of places including a party they had for family and friends.

4 (39m 40s):
And so that was the initial initial hustle for us. And then we had the SBA loan, but we ultimately Had a ton of credit cards that

3 (39m 50s):
we were able to use to to continue building. I

2 (39m 54s):
said math just Hopscotch from one to the next.

4 (39m 58s):
Yes. We got a lot. We had I don't know six different credit cards that we were

3 (40m 2s):
using. And by the way was the first product that you end up launching

4 (40m 5s):
with that we launched 4:13

3 (40m 7s):
products. Well, okay, so like different cleaners for different Fabrics

4 (40m 12s):
exactly. So we we had an ALT our signature detergent which is like for every day and then we divide then the rest of it was more

3 (40m 19s):
novelty. So products like delicate wash wool and Cashmere

4 (40m 25s):
and we we wanted to launch with a start-to-finish laundering experience all in one cent because there wasn't that experience for people and so that created

2 (40m 35s):
obviously more than just a few products to

4 (40m 38s):
launch with how many

3 (40m 41s):
actual bottles of things. Did you order like 5,000 10,000 new member

4 (40m 47s):
we Ordered about

2 (40m 48s):
250 of each scale a

4 (40m 51s):
very small run we were able to partner with a small manufacturer that's not typical. Usually the runs are very high. But like at the time it was like all we could possibly handle like there was no way that we were going. I mean that would last us

3 (41m 9s):
almost a year six months to a year. All right. So so you both of you guys still had some connections in the fashion world because I mean you Had experience selling your t-shirts at Saks and and and you'd worked you were your channel. So you were working with people who were buying Chanel products and was the idea that you would sell the laundress products at stores like Saks and and Bloomingdale's and and Bendel and was that the idea initially?

4 (41m 37s):
Yes. I yes. It was definitely what can we tackle first? So that list consisted of friends of friends who had a boutique and the Hamptons for instance or Or in our in our towns that we that we grew up in or even local stores in New York City and then Bergdorf Goodman it would they were a client of mine at Chanel and that was a whole nother. I mean going into department stores with the luxury detergent if you know what a department store outline or layout looks like it doesn't there's no laundry section. Yes. So while I had all of these contacts at Department Doors it wasn't that simple.

4 (42m 20s):
I had to act if almost five or six different departments before anyone really even knew what to do

3 (42m 26s):
with me or

4 (42m 27s):
product and even then they didn't know what to do. I mean I was selling the product at the cash register, you know at the at the counter because in order to get them to believe in that the product needed to be there, I guess Bergdorf

3 (42m 43s):
Goodman was your first big client to say. Alright. Well, we'll put this up there. Did you get into Burger Bergdorf Goodman? Well

4 (42m 51s):
first I spoke with the lingerie buyer because I we were selling delicate wash. So this is a product that was very commonly found for women for washing lingerie. And then I was able to navigate once I had credibility with the lines right buyer. I was able to look at being with the cashmere buyer and then ultimately with the beauty buyer which is where everyone would want to be, you know.

2 (43m 18s):
No And as far as selling a product like that

4 (43m 21s):
and the beauty buyer at the time love the brand loved the idea and you know,

2 (43m 26s):
they had an exclusive we gave them an exclusive for six months

4 (43m 30s):
to be the only people selling the laundress and this worked out really well. And by the way, were you keeping

3 (43m 37s):
absolutely silent about this pitch to people know that you working on

4 (43m 40s):
this? No one now? Yeah. I wanted to make sure that my

3 (43m 44s):
job was Secure if I

4 (43m 46s):
ultimately didn't take

3 (43m 48s):
Leap or

4 (43m 50s):
I always wanted I always had a plan B. I had a plan B for five years into the laundress. I always wanted to make sure that I was going to be

3 (43m 59s):
relevant in my industry and be able to get another job because you would not quit the job your job yet

4 (44m 4s):
now now and I need that income I needed that income. I needed that job and I wanted that

3 (44m 10s):
job. By the way, I read that you have this really uncomfortable moment at Bergdorf Goodman because when you went there to pitch your laundry products, apparently you ran into another Bergdorf buyer who knew you from us Chanel.

4 (44m 28s):
So I actually I actually at that same time I ran past the the woman that let me in, you know through the security. I passed by my buyers office the meaning the Chanel buyer that I work with. To get to this new buyer that I was meeting for the laundress. She was like, oh do I have an appointment? There's like no. No, I'm meeting with someone else and I just kind of like just hurried by like there was no it was really awkward really uncomfortable because she was like, hey, what are you doing here? Yeah. She thought II am I am I meeting you and what did you tell her? I said no. No. No, I'm no I'm meeting with somebody else like we're good, you

3 (45m 7s):
know, and she didn't even question it. Well you nervous that she was gonna blow your cover.

4 (45m 11s):
I was very Nervous, but no she didn't it happened so quickly and honestly I left there so excited because they wanted the laundress that I think at that point. I didn't really

3 (45m 25s):
care. And when when did you pull the trigger on quitting your job like right before you launched? Exactly. Did anybody, you know your family or anybody say you sure you want to do this? My mom.

4 (45m 38s):
She said are you sure you know, she like over and over again? Again, and you know my family never doubted what I could do or couldn't do but I think they were worried because then I was going to be their problem. Yeah, and I think Gwen family questioned her as well. I mean this was we were leaving coveted jobs and places. We were very happy at but we were passionate and then ultimately they supported

3 (46m 10s):
that So you quit your job and you launch this thing and was it like, you know gangbusters was, you know, just a frenzy to buy your stuff like all of a sudden everybody going for the laundress, or was it come more

4 (46m 25s):
likely. It's definitely not a frenzy. It was really difficult to get people on board. We had to I mean there was there were moments when I made a list of stores to call and I would be calling and calling and calling. Me and people wouldn't call me back. So I would go to the store to meet the buyer and we're talking about boutiques now the smaller boutiques because that is the majority of our business. It was really the bulk of how the brand was built. I actually there's a store in the West Village that I that we really wanted to be in because the positioning was really good for our brand and he refused to call me back.

4 (47m 6s):
So I

2 (47m 7s):
showed up with the products

4 (47m 8s):
and I spent the whole day there and I said, just let me sell the For you and you don't have to take it after I just want to show you that this is where our product should be. And ultimately he's one of our best clients and in New York when you

3 (47m 20s):
launched this, I mean you you from what I understand you had you launched it with about a hundred and ten thousand dollars. So I'm assuming you're thinking we need to make money quickly to be able to pay our bills and expand and make

2 (47m 37s):
more product. But from what I understand like the

3 (47m 40s):
first At least three years in probably four years. You are not profitable. You were actually losing money, right? That is true.

4 (47m 47s):
We weren't making any money. We didn't take a salary. We had to write down what our bills were and pay our bills and that's it, you know, so we

3 (47m 55s):
didn't lose our Apartments

4 (47m 58s):
but we ultimately between 2004 and 2008. We worked with rap groups so different people that would sell the product for commission. So we've positioned our products with in showrooms. I'm in Dallas and Atlanta and LA and New

2 (48m 14s):
York and because showrooms of what

4 (48m 16s):
showrooms where they had other brands so linen like bedding showrooms that where would make sense for someone buying Linens and bedding that they would buy our product. We were also in fashion show rooms where there was clothing and then they would buy our product. So we positioned ourselves in places like that and we did a ton of trade shows.

3 (48m 39s):
So you had you had to depend on Only on income from this business, but how did you if you're not getting any income? How are you like paying your rent and buying food and stuff?

4 (48m 50s):
Well, we had to pay our rent as a bill. It was like part of our you know accounts

3 (48m 54s):
payable so through for our

4 (48m 56s):
business and that way because everything was everything was personally guaranteed. Our credit cards. We used credit cards and then we would look at our our bills and our finances and say, okay what who needs to get paid first. What's going to be cut off first and but we had orders coming in. So there was always a flow of cash. It's just that we weren't. Anything that we made went back in, you know back into the business. It wasn't

3 (49m 24s):
like in our pocket right and just curious in those in those early years when you weren't making money. Did you ever were you ever tempted to try and get outside money just to make sure you didn't collapse

4 (49m 38s):
know we were able to we had we had money coming in. So it wasn't we weren't concerned about collapsing. We probably could have done a lot more at a faster pace. That probably we definitely could have but we we wouldn't have the same amount of control our brand would most likely look very different today is

3 (50m 2s):
I mean when when you when investors eventually start to make pitches to you who want to invest what why did you conclude that? It was not in your interest to take the

4 (50m 11s):
money. They weren't going to they weren't going to give us enough money to get they wanted a lot of they wanted to high percentage. They wanted a lot of equity for not. Not for not giving us that much money and ultimately the what we were going to do with that money wasn't going to get us faster in sales. So wasn't

3 (50m 32s):
going to get us to where we need to be any faster. Do you were you were getting some like firm saying will give you a million dollars for 25 percent, right?

4 (50m 39s):
So we would lose control but not we weren't going to be at you know, a hundred million dollar company overnight so or whatever, you know and throw that number out there, but like it wasn't going to be We were going to get there any faster and we were really happy with the direction of the brand that you did you feel like

3 (50m 58s):
I mean when you would go to these firms and they offered you, you know a little bit of money for a huge Equity stake. Did you walk out of meetings is feeling like undervalued and irritative. Yes all

4 (51m 13s):
the time. And actually one of the meetings the guys fell asleep on us. We're presenting to them classy classy. Yeah.

2 (51m 21s):
Last week and he was trying to like

4 (51m 23s):
act like he wasn't sleeping and and we noticed right away and we're like really and we spent a lot of time presenting and and we're very passionate about our ideas. And then someone's falling asleep that didn't really bode. Well with us, we didn't find there wasn't a partner that we had that we met that really understood the business. I think that becomes

3 (51m 46s):
that was something that if we found

4 (51m 48s):
a partner that really got it I

3 (51m 51s):
Think that storyline would have done a little different. I read that like this is one one instance were like one of the customers you had went behind your back directly to your the factors that we're making your product and and had them white

4 (52m 6s):
label the same products for them. Is that true? Hmm. What's that? That's that happen. Well, we had our into it was probably around 2006. We started selling to Russia. And it seems random but it's not really random because Gwen had lived in Russia and we had some contacts there and there was some really beautiful stores there that that we knew those laundress would be, you know, perfect for and we found his a distributor to sell the product to all of these stores. We did a huge launch an event. It was so much fun in Moscow and Success like very quickly and that market and so much so that we you know not having Capital like we really couldn't keep up with the demand and we also couldn't give anyone special payment terms.

4 (53m 6s):
We needed the payment terms, you know, we were the ones that were the ones that you know who were struggling in that regard and a lot of the distributor is want one. Give payments over a period of time and we really needed to be paid in advance before we shift any Goods especially overseas. What if we never saw that money, so this specific distributor went directly to our manufacturer. Yeah, and he was buying the product from our manufacturer at a lower price. And so it's not legal by the way, so no.

4 (53m 47s):
No, it's not legal. So what did you do? Well, what do you do when you don't have a lot of money to to legally go after somebody we confronted the manufacturer we confronted the distributor and we just stopped working with him. We owned our formulas and we went somewhere else.

3 (54m 6s):
I guess you don't really have money to

4 (54m 8s):
Sue. Ya suing suing him would have been a long headache and a A lot of money and we needed to move forward and ultimately this the distributor that we were working with then come to find out which is even worse than what he was doing with the manufacturer was a he was making counterfeit product and we found out from a client because she had a rash

2 (54m 34s):
that those are the moments when we

4 (54m 35s):
thought oh my goodness. How are we ever going to recover from this? You know, that was definitely a struggle Google for us yeah, so the client we had to immediately said to the client. Can I see the bottle? Can you send me the bottle? And so it turns out it wasn't our formulation. It was our branding our lay our name so, you know looked like it was our product and the same distributor that was selling our product. Was making additional units because he had a demand and he wanted to satisfy and I didn't care. He was sacrificing he was buying it cheaper poor quality and selling it.

4 (55m 20s):
So we had both products in the market. So he was leveraging self as being a licensed distributor of laundress because he was and then selling counterfeit product at the same time. Yeah. Well so that that you know we early Leon had all of our name trademarked in any country that we were sold to so we owned the the licensing and the trademarks and when you sign when you have a distributor you allow them to use your name and all those things, but it was really hard for our trademark lawyer to pin that down and and ultimately it would have cost way too much money for not a lot of results.

4 (55m 60s):
So we pulled from them. And yeah and luckily it didn't become a global.

3 (56m 6s):
You for us. So while you were I mean, you're trying to kind of get awareness you your kind of the I guess the the trajectory was good because you're growing. Hmm. What was the turning point? I guess by 2008 you finally became profitable. I'm I think you did one point eight million dollars in sales in that's Revenue. So so maybe you know, maybe you know, your your expenses were like, Seven million that year so you were finally profitable which meant that you and Gwen could finally take a salary. Maybe it was fifty thousand dollars each or 40 thousand dollars each and what what what was the turning point?

3 (56m 47s):
Was there anything in particular that got you to profitability? Yes a few

4 (56m 52s):
different things. We well our e-commerce business was continuing to grow and then we were also expanding globally we signed up in 2006 with our first distributor in Europe we also were able to get into areas of Asia as well. Some of our first clients were in Hong Kong as well as Tokyo. Yeah, so we were able to be profitable take salary start hiring employees and running like a real business when

3 (57m 30s):
you've heard of tartar Prophet was that Was that kind of the beginning of profitability from that point forward? Was it just to just grow up because 2008-2009 its financial crisis.

4 (57m 40s):
Yeah, so it's a weird time for us because we were growing and it was a horrible time for you know, our us business wasn't really growing at all. So we had to Pivot quickly and focus on we always had a diverse business portfolio from International us retail and then e calm and so we put a lot of our Our energy and focus on this the the markets are the clients that we're doing well in the u.s. Put a lot of energy in them. So like really the bigger stores and we look to our International partners and spent a lot of time going over there and and meeting the customers and putting a lot of energy and those markets that were doing well and this is something that I think was really really is important.

4 (58m 33s):
Orton for Brands to think about and you know having just one way for Revenue it can be really

2 (58m 42s):
tough. I think about that now

4 (58m 44s):
too during quarantine and whatever one's going through it's very it's important to to be creative and think about think of all the angles of what you're doing because if we were only sold in the u.s. Boutiques, we would not have

3 (59m 2s):
come out of that the way we

2 (59m 3s):
It

3 (59m 4s):
so you're growing and the growth is organic. It sounds like it's organic and and bite. I guess what 2015 you open a store if a brick and mortar store.

4 (59m 15s):
Yeah, and that was entirely

3 (59m 17s):
financed just by the revenue that the company was generating. Yes. Exactly.

4 (59m 22s):
And that was the initial plan. We wanted it the service in the store. We wanted to really show the lifestyle of laundry and have a place where people could go and ask questions and and try the products and smell the products. The scent experience is really really important to our brand and sent in general for detergents are very important to two clients and customers. I mean, they're they're very nostalgic and it makes them think of their, you know, our baby detergent people still use even though they don't have babies anymore. You know, it makes them think of that time and I think coming from brands with stores it Something we always kind of dreamed of we didn't know when I was going to happen.

4 (1h 0m 7s):
And and actually our first store wasn't was it in New York City. It was in sin Juku station in Tokyo, Japan. Really? Yes a tiny little place. It's still there. It's fantastic. So they were the first people on board with having a having a laundress retail store and then New York and then we have

3 (1h 0m 27s):
Seoul Korea as well why I mean it's interesting. Why why so And Tokyo is there is there is that is the product is really

4 (1h 0m 36s):
very strong Market. Yeah, very strong markets for us what explains their tremendous understanding of fashion and their love for clothing. They are Fanatics about caring for their wardrobe. So they jumped on board quickly and so did your up as well a lot faster than the US market so you guys are

3 (1h 0m 59s):
expanding your profitable, but but I guess rap. Round like 2018. You start thinking about finding a buyer for your brand. Yeah, and and why were you were you both just like kind of done like we're you just really I mean, I mean you work like insanely hard and you're just kind of burned out and is that is that why

4 (1h 1m 23s):
it was more about us it had to happen. Otherwise, we weren't going to be able to grow any bigger than we were and I think We were scared about giving you know, having an outside investor because we didn't know what that looked like mean. We were we've been doing this for 15 years. It's like what is that going to look like to us? We heard really scary stories from

3 (1h 1m 50s):
friends of ours that

2 (1h 1m 51s):
had businesses for a long

4 (1h 1m 53s):
time and you know, a lot of our friends that are successful in their unhappy there are miserable and so, you know, I'm talking about not a a start-up

3 (1h 2m 3s):
getting money but like

4 (1h 2m 5s):
being in this business and living and breathing at every day for 15 years and then having an outside partner come in and tell you to do things differently. It's not

2 (1h 2m 14s):
received. Well, I don't think so. We

4 (1h 2m 19s):
that was something that we explored and we had three different companies come to us with interest of buying us and and partnering with us. So The timing was just really meant to be and we

3 (1h 2m 36s):
were ready you got an offer from the you accepted from Unilever. Yes, exactly. They'd bought your brand reportedly four hundred million dollars and and kept you on you would stay on. I'm still working there. You stay an employee of Unilever now running the business, but with with Unilever behind you you now I mean that was one of the biggest multinational in the world. I mean the sky's the limit you could probably scale and in any way you want. To

4 (1h 3m 3s):
so it's interesting because that's the potential but in the beginning, you know, it's really about keeping the brand integrity and on the identity and the way that they work is that they really are adamant about keeping the brand

3 (1h 3m 20s):
separate but obviously

4 (1h 3m 22s):
joined but separate in the sense where we're still have our same office. We still have all the same employees and our DNA looks and feels the same we have additional resources. But we are we do really kind of run on our own still. So while scaling will happen. It's not oh you acquire you get acquired in like poof. You're an overnight sensation. Like it's not it doesn't work that quickly. And so under navigating that has that's the challenge now to really take what they have at our disposal and scaling.

4 (1h 4m 3s):
So

3 (1h 4m 4s):
when you I mean when you think about this journey you took and what happened. I mean, you know, you sold this company made a lot of money. It was not a guaranteed slam dunk. It was a slow burn it took a long time before you were able to really become profitable. There's a lot of stress. Do you think that the success of this company had to do with ahem how hard you and Gwen work to do you think some of it had to do with luck?

4 (1h 4m 32s):
I It had to do with the success of how I mean how hard we work the success came from the hard work luck, you know, we carved out. We just we went into an industry like we disrupted a multibillion-dollar industry. I mean we We definitely were ahead of our time and you know and pioneering a product that didn't exist. Yeah, I think I don't know. It depends on your definition of luck. I think you create your own luck does. I

3 (1h 5m 5s):
mean you you really could have struggled for so long with this business and even when you could pee herself, I can't imagine you ever really were able to pay yourself huge amounts of money. Maybe maybe it's more significant towards the end, but never You know, I'm assuming you know, this Unilever thing it made you and Gwen rich. I mean, I'm probably beyond what you ever imagined so weird that that kind of change the way you I don't know lived or you

4 (1h 5m 35s):
know, I think I think because it was something so, you know along the journey. We saw a lot of our friends Excel and save money and buy homes and and all these things and we weren't able to save we didn't have any money to We were all of our money was going back into the business. So I think ultimately our goal of selling to a

2 (1h 5m 55s):
strategic was kind of our way of saving if you will like we knew like investing this

4 (1h 6m 1s):
like, you know, everything into a business would

2 (1h 6m 3s):
ultimately pay off and that was what happened. That's Lindsay Boyd co-founder of the laundress the company now sells more than 80 products and they've expanded Beyond just a fabric care to include household. Owners as well and while so many companies are suffering during the current economic crisis. Lindsay says their business is actually up by a hundred and fifty percent because people are stuck at home doing cooking cleaning hands. Yes laundry. If you go to a

3 (1h 6m 39s):
barbecue by the way, would you still be comfortable wearing white? Yes.

2 (1h 6m 44s):
You would you do that if you were white to our I have a white sofa with two small children? Oh

4 (1h 6m 49s):
my God. My whole hat. My house is

2 (1h 6m 51s):
white like dogs. Just threw up on our sofa. It's great. What do I do quick? What do I do? It happily happen really need stay in solution and bleach alternative way. No, you don't have to worry about the right away thing. You can do it later. It's stained will still come out if it's properly treated. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week you can Subscribe, wherever you get your podcasts, you can also write to us at H by V T at npr.org if you want to send a tweet. It's as how I built this or and Guy Roz. This episode was produced by Rachel Falkner with music composed by run teen Arab Louis. Thanks also to JC Howard Kansas limb Darris Gail's Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

2 (1h 7m 37s):
I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built

3 (1h 7m 40s):
this. This is NPR.

2 (1h 7m 49s):
Every business has to figure out what to charge for its product and how to keep out competitors. You know, who does this better than anyone else drug dealers on the next episode of Planet Money summer school. We explain pricing Theory with a drug kingpin summer school new classes every Wednesday listen now to Planet money from NPR.