0 (0s):
It's Sky Ross. Here on the Wisdom from the Top podcast. I talk to leadership experts and some of the world's greatest business leaders about how they lead, innovate, and transform the people around them. If you're trying to make it in business or just wanna think more like a leader, this show probably for you. Listen now to the Wisdom from the Top podcast. From Luminary and N. P r

Airbnb (21s):
Maybe. you stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with a spare room, or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe your kid is heading off to college in the fall and you'll have an empty bedroom. You could Airbnb it and make some extra cash while they're away. Or, if you have a vacation plan for this summer, that could be a good time to Airbnb your entire place. Whether you could use a little extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home or spare room might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot ca slash Host

Zensurance (1m 5s):
are you an entrepreneur or a startup owner? Starting a new business is an exciting journey, but it also comes with its fair share of risks and uncertainties. As a new business owner. You invest significant time, effort, and capital into building your venture business. Insurance safeguards your hard work by protecting your personal assets. Without it. A substantial liability claim could put your personal finances like your savings or your home at risk. Liability insurance also gives you a competitive edge in the market. Many clients and partners require proof of insurance before engaging in business relationships. So visit Zensurance dot com slash save three five to get a free quote for the low cost insurance protection you need so you can focus on growing your business. Worry free.

1 (2m 1s):
Amazon five star reviews presents better than a wooden steak. Today's customer review is from a customer that goes by burnt toast. They write, ever since this three pack of organic garlic was delivered, I have not seen a single vampire. That cannot be a coincidence. We'll update my review If anything changes, five stars. Well burnt toast if it doesn't work, and at least you got the beginnings of a nice marinara. That's how to make everyday better real Amazon customers. Real reviews, really.

0 (2m 30s):
Hey, you know, we hear a lot of stories on How, I, Built This about facing hurdles and overcoming obstacles. I recently talked about this with actor Billy Porter. He's won an Emmy, a Tony, and a Grammy, and is a red carpet icon, but he shared some pretty candid insights about spending nearly a decade in obscurity because he refused to be typecast and pigeonholed into the same roles again and again. You should definitely check out my interview with Billy Porter on my other podcast. It's called The Great Creators. Just search for the Great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. Or go to the great creators.com and now onto today's show.

3 (3m 17s):
Come January. It wasn't moving. Tetris wasn't moving. And what happens when, when they have product in January, like after Christmas, the distributors start dumping the rest of their inventory. They have to get rid of it because yeah, if it's not selling, it's never gonna sell. Which

0 (3m 34s):
Means cut price, cut rate, price.

3 (3m 36s):
Yeah. They're like, and, and I, whew, my goodness. I had my sales guys call. Every distributor said, hang onto your inventory. This is not like other games. It is going to take off much more slowly than other games, but once it takes off, it's gonna be, you know, it's gonna be a hit.

0 (4m 4s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I am Guy Raz and on the show today how Henk Rogers got hooked on Tetris and risked Time, money, and a trip behind the Iron Curtain to spread the game around the world. You can learn a lot by playing Tetris. Things like patience or strategy, even risk-taking and perseverance. You can also learn a lot by listening to how Tetris came to be, because this is a story very much about patience, strategy, risk-taking, and perseverance.

0 (4m 54s):
When Henk Rogers first encountered this obscure Russian video game at a convention back in 1988, he was instantly hooked. And he believed that others would be hooked as well.

2 (5m 7s):
But

0 (5m 8s):
A lot of obstacles stood in Hank's way. There were Soviet bureaucrats for starters, there were powerful companies like Atari claiming rights to the game, and executives at Nintendo who weren't convinced that Tetris was a gamble worth taking. This story is so full of intrigue, rivalries, and backstabbing that Hollywood made a fictionalized film based on Hank's life. That movie, by the way, is a lot of fun, but also partly made up. This version of the story that you're about to hear is not, it's the story of how Henk Rogers made Tetris one of the most popular video games of all time, and how he and its original creator, Alexey POV came to own it.

0 (5m 53s):
Henk was born in the Netherlands, but his family moved to the, the US when he was a kid, first to New York and eventually to Hawaii. Hank's dad worked in the jewelry business and went on to move the family to Japan, but Henk stayed back in Hawaii to go to college.

3 (6m 11s):
I always say that I majored in computer science and I minored in Dungeons and Dragons. We had a gaming club. And so what I did on the computer when I wasn't doing homework assignments is, is make little routines that would be like aids to the Dungeon Master. So we didn't have to do roll all those dice all the time. 'cause Rolling Dice is something a computer is really good at. Mm. And I'd had to store my programs on paper tape.

0 (6m 40s):
And, and to be clear, these were, these were text-based games, these were not graph, there's no, there were no graphics games.

3 (6m 47s):
Well, there. So the computer didn't have any graphics. So the information that I get would give to the Dungeon Masters, just reams of paper.

0 (6m 56s):
Yeah.

3 (6m 57s):
And basically, I, I, I took all the computer classes I could take and at the end of, you know, like my third year, they, they called me in and says, Mr. Rogers, I said, what's going on? I said, what do you mean? He says, well, you haven't taken any of your core requirements. And I said, well, I've already been to high school. So that was my New York attitude coming through. And they said, well, if you're, if you're not gonna take your core requirements, you're not gonna graduate. And I said, there must be some mistake. I'm not here to graduate. I'm here to get an education. And I think I already got it. Thank you.

0 (7m 33s):
So you, you don't finish university, but you, you end up moving to Japan to followed a girl who became your wife and, and, and she was is Japanese.

3 (7m 43s):
Yes.

0 (7m 45s):
And I guess when you got there, you ended up joining your dad, working your dad with your dad in the Gem Trade

3 (7m 52s):
For six years. I was mostly on the, I wasn't so much on the sales or any of that. I was on the figuring out new techniques for cutting new kinds of gem material. You know, I, that's sort of, I'm on, on the technical and mechanical side of that business. How,

0 (8m 10s):
How did his business do in Japan at the time?

3 (8m 12s):
I, you know, like he, he went rags to riches so many times. So yeah, he was good at it. And, but, but he never, he never did business properly. In other words, he never had an accountant, he never paid taxes. It was all just in his head. He would always just hand out money when he had money and, and not when he didn't. Yeah. He always did things by the seat of his pants. So he didn't, he didn't understand how to have a, you know, how can I say, a company with people that actually do the things that you need to get done without you Yeah.

3 (8m 54s):
That's even, that's a big, that's okay. It's the first difference between my father and myself. I've got companies running all over the place. Even my first business, I, I had other people doing stuff so that the business would run, even though I wasn't there at that moment. Hmm.

0 (9m 11s):
So you work with your dad for around six years, and I guess around 1982, you decide to leave and to start your own business. And, and it, it, it, it's related to the personal computer boom. That's starting to happen, particularly in developed countries like the US and Japan. It's the early eighties. You got the PCs coming to market and it's gonna change everything. You decide to start essentially a software company that would make, like, would create like role-playing games for PCs,

3 (9m 45s):
The Japanese version of a pc. Yes. Now, I didn't have a publishing company and I didn't know how to, how to publish or how to do any of that, or how to do business in Japan. I never studied business. And so I went to SoftBank. That was the, you know, SoftBank is this huge multi billion dollar company today, but at that time, all they were was a little company doing distribution for computer software to computer shops. That's it. Anyway, I said, can you introduce me to a publisher? And they said, you know what, you really don't need a publisher. You know, just get your wife to answer the phone and you can publish yourself.

3 (10m 28s):
You know, we'll, we'll introduce you to a company that can actually do the duplication of the cassettes and the discs, whatever, and you can pay them after we pay you. I said, wow, that sounds great. Okay. Sounds so simple. But of course it wasn't so simple and I didn't speak, read or write Japanese at the time. So yeah, that was pretty interesting experience starting a company without knowing anything.

0 (10m 54s):
Yeah. So you, I guess the first sort of role playing game that you guys launched was called the Black Onyx. Yeah,

3 (11m 3s):
So the Black Onyx was the first role playing game in Japan. And this is in the days when one person could write a game all by themselves. Wow. Do all the graphics, do everything.

0 (11m 16s):
And you weren't moving around a person, you were, it was just, you were tech, you were typing text into the, into the computer, right?

3 (11m 22s):
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. I actually had a pseudo three D that you walked through.

0 (11m 28s):
Oh, okay. Alright. Okay.

3 (11m 29s):
So, so, so

0 (11m 30s):
You had like a controller. You used like a, well, was there

3 (11m 33s):
A mouse? No, used the 10 key. You used the 10 key. There was no mo no mouse yet. Okay. It was before, before Mice. No, you used the, the 10 key to forward turn, left turn right, move forward one square at a time.

0 (11m 47s):
I mean, the game became quite successful. But like, what did that mean for, for your, your small business Bulletproof Software? Was it, I mean, I know it became like a big game in Japan, but did that mean that you guys were like rolling in cash? Or, or, or not quite,

3 (12m 1s):
Well, let me, let me backtrack because this is an interesting part of the story. So I went, SoftBank had had said they would buy 3000 copies for Christmas. And when it came close to Christmas, they realized that nobody understood what a role playing game was. And so, and the little advertising that I did was just completely ineffective. So they, they rolled back their initial order to 600 and I thought, oh, we're dead in the water come January. I, you know, I call my guys together. By this time I had a, you know, some testers and, and some office people say like, how do people in Japan find out about computer games? I said, well, they, they read about 'em in the magazine.

3 (12m 43s):
So what I did was I got one of my guys to call all the magazines and make appointments and we actually went to visit them and I would show them how to play Black Onyx and leave them with the game. And every single magazine that we visited had rave reviews like a month later. And then SoftBank came back and we had, for April we had 10,000 units and, and May 10,000 units. So we were like killing it. We were a number one game in, in Japan in 1984. Yeah.

0 (13m 18s):
I I guess writing your own game is, is one thing, but, but really, basically you wanna be a game publisher and so you start to look for other existing games that you could license or, or bring to Japan.

3 (13m 29s):
I had to make a decision at the end of year two whether I was gonna make another game or whether I was gonna focus on running the company. And, you know, there's my, my wife had been a computer widow for two years, meaning I, I was like on the computer day and night for, for two years pretty much. And I said, you know, this isn't something that I can do for the rest of my life. So I, I started traveling around the world looking for games to bring to Japan. 'cause at the time, movies were coming from other countries and music was coming from other countries. So I, I could see that all this culture was being imported from a lot of, from the US and well, games shouldn't be any different.

0 (14m 12s):
Hmm. And, and I guess one of the games that, that you played was go the, the ancient Chinese game of, of Logic, I guess sort of, I guess you could describe it. And, and I read that you thought that this was a game that you could maybe publish in, in Japan. And, and I guess you had this idea of maybe working with Nintendo. Tell me, tell me about how that, how that came about and why you decided to, to take it to Nintendo.

3 (14m 35s):
Yeah, so my wife had read an article in, in a magazine saying that Mr. Yauch plays goal.

0 (14m 43s):
And this is the guy who was the head of Nintendo.

3 (14m 46s):
The head of Nintendo. So I sent him a fax, Mr. Yauch, my name is Henk Rogers, I can make a goal game for your Nintendo machine. I'm leaving on Saturday. I would like to see you before I leave. I didn't tell him the part about I live in Japan. Yeah. And that was going to be back next week on Tuesday. I sent the fax. Wednesday his assistant sends me a fax. Mr. Ya Mochi will meet you tomorrow.

0 (15m 13s):
He'll, so he's a captain of industry in Japan. I mean, big

3 (15m 17s):
Deal. He's, he's the ayatollah of the computer game business. I mean, this guy is Iron fist. Yeah. You know, nobody gets to see him. And I get to see him in two days. It's like, amazing. Wow. That's amazing. So I, I come into the office and he's sitting across from me and Yamo says, I can't give you any programmers. I said, I don't need programmers, I just need money. And he says, how much? And I said, gosh, I mean, I, well, I'm thinking of what's the biggest number I can think of right now? And I said, $300,000. And he said, he reached across the table and said, deal. That was it.

3 (15m 58s):
It's like, wow. Holy smokes. That was so fast.

0 (16m 2s):
And you didn't need a license. 'cause Go was not owned by anybody. It was nature game, right? Yeah, yeah. So you, you were essentially going to program code the game and, and for a fee for $300,000. And then Nintendo would turn it into a game. And that was it. That was the deal.

3 (16m 18s):
That was the deal. I contacted the programmer in England, made a deal with him, convinced him to come to Japan. And we spent next nine months mo you know, creating all the graphics. And we had little ninjas jumping around the, the, the stones were floating, and when the stone landed, it would fall down on its shadow so that you Oh. It was just a great graphically. And it was, it was a great game. Yeah. So nine months later, I'm back in the, in the room with, with Yamauchi, and he wants to play. And so he's got the machine set up and he's fumbling with the controller. And I realize this guy's never played any of the games on the shelf.

3 (17m 4s):
His machine. Yeah. He, he hasn't, he's just run the company. He hasn't like, played any of those games. So, okay, fine. And he hands a controller over the guy's sitting next to him and he points to where he wants to play. I wanna go there, I wanna go there. I wanna go there. After one game, after one game, Mr. Amichi says it's two weak for Nintendo. I'm like, wow. Flabbergasted. I mean, it's a miracle that this thing can play go at all. And I, I, you know, I, I'm fumbling for words. I said, Mr. Oui, it's an eight bit computer that there's never gonna be a stronger co algorithm than this. He said, it's too weak for Nintendo.

3 (17m 46s):
Like, I, what, what, which part? Didn't you, you understand? It's like, so, so again, I had to think fast. I said, okay, Mr. Yauch, maybe it's, maybe it's not strong enough for Nintendo, but it's strong enough for my company. Let me publish it. And he goes, what about my money, the $300,000? I said, okay, I'll pay you a dollar per unit until you get your money back. Deal. And so that's how I became a Nintendo publisher.

0 (18m 15s):
So essentially, Mr. Yai from Nintendo was like, Hey, we don't want this game. We don't wanna, we don't wanna make it. But If you wanna make it, you know, and, and on your own and sell it to people and they can use it on the Nintendo system. That's fine. That's, that's your decision.

3 (18m 29s):
Yeah. He just didn't wanna put Nintendo's name on the game. Yeah,

0 (18m 32s):
I gotcha. So basically you do this deal where you're gonna pay him back a dollar for every cartridge you sell until they get their 300,000 back. And, and, and how, how did it do?

3 (18m 47s):
We sold 150,000 copies.

0 (18m 49s):
All right. So, not bad.

3 (18m 51s):
Not bad. He didn't get his money back. But

0 (18m 53s):
You, it's all right. But you got your fee. You got your fee right.

3 (18m 56s):
I got my, I and I got my fingers dirty in the Nintendo business. And,

0 (19m 0s):
And I guess more importantly, you, you established a relationship with Nintendo. I mean, you had now an inn to the top dog, a Nintendo.

3 (19m 8s):
Oh, yeah. And then whenever I met him after that, I always set up the meeting on a day when I'm the last meeting, his last meeting. And then we, we'd play go for the rest of the day. I had all this one-on-one time with mochi, which nobody had.

0 (19m 23s):
That's, that's what I'm wondering, why would he give you some unknown 30 year old the time of day and the guy's running a Nintendo?

3 (19m 32s):
I was, I was a go player.

0 (19m 34s):
I'm surprised that his underlings didn't intervene and prevent you from, 'cause you'd probably have to go through a secretary and make an appointment. And I'm surprised they weren't like, no, this guy cannot meet Mr. Ya mochi.

3 (19m 45s):
Well, they did not have any say in what Mr. Ya mochi did or didn't do.

0 (19m 54s):
That's a good contact man. If, if he

3 (19m 56s):
Ever found out that one of his underlings had canceled a meeting, that person would be fired.

0 (20m 1s):
Yeah. So this is going to be a, a oppression, because eventually Nintendo's gonna come back into this story. But, but you continue to pers you've got, you're running this company and, and you are running a publishing company. You're trying to, you know, you're trying to find a hit. And, and from a revenue standpoint, how is your business doing overall? Was it very successful, moderately successful? Not successful?

3 (20m 27s):
No. It was, it was, it was successful enough. You know, I was publishing, I, I published Star Wars. I published e Electronic Arts, two of their, of their first four games. I was licensing games from all over the planet and publishing them in Japan.

0 (20m 44s):
And probably, I mean, because the video game industry was so new, there was probably, probably a lot of these companies were eager to get it to the Japanese market. And you Right. I mean, you were sort of had one foot in Japan, one foot in the us you could go back and forth.

3 (20m 57s):
Yeah. So the, the, the nice thing about me and and publishing it was that I got to make the decision. So I, I could go to a consumer electronic show, look at a game. I really like this game. Okay, let's make a deal. I didn't have to send it back to Japan and have a have a bunch of managers sign off. Yes, I agree. Yes, I agree. Yes, I agree. I could make a decision. Yeah. So I was always faster than everybody else.

0 (21m 24s):
And you were going to these trade shows in the US constantly looking for new games Yeah. To, to bring back to Japan, to license. And, and so you go to the Consumer Electronic Electronics Show, which still happens in Las Vegas every year. You're there in 1988, and you come across Tetris, which you'd never seen before.

3 (21m 44s):
Exactly. I mean, there it was. And it, it just, it seemed out of place. You know, every other game was like graphics with little characters running around Yeah. And bullets and God knows what. And here was a game that was just totally puzzle.

0 (22m 1s):
Just shapes, just, just geometric shapes.

3 (22m 3s):
Yeah. And it, that was very interesting to me. You know, like If, you look at Go, it's just black and white stones. Yeah. It's the simplest looking game. And yet it's the deep mo deepest, most interesting game. So the fact that this, this game was like little Squares didn't turn me off. I was just interested in, I was, I just got hooked on it right there on, on the spot.

0 (22m 28s):
It's interesting 'cause I'm thinking back in 1988 and I was probably playing, I don't know, like Super Mario Brothers and Mike Tyson's punch out and, you know, Zelda, the legend of Zelda. Yeah. There were some pretty sophisticated games. And you come across Tetris and you're like, wow, this is amazing. I mean, it's right. 'cause it's, it seems like counterintuitive that you would go to the flashy, cool games with characters.

3 (22m 52s):
Yeah. You, you would think, but no, that's not how my mind works. Obviously I got hooked on the game and I said, well, this is a, this is a great game. So I, and then I took it back to Japan, you know, samples. And sure enough, everybody else in the company got hooked on it too. So I wasn't just me.

0 (23m 15s):
When we come back in just a moment, Henk brings Tetris to Japan, gets a $2 million loan to keep production going, and then discovers that even though he thinks he has the rights to the game, he really doesn't stay with us.

3 (23m 31s):
I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How, I Built This.

Squarespace (23m 42s):
You know, building a great business can be hard, but making sure people know about your business doesn't have to be. Squarespace is the all in one platform for building your brand and growing your business online. Stand out with a beautiful website, engage with your audience and sell anything your products, content you create, and even your time, no matter what your business. Squarespace has tools that can help. And you can create an online store to sell your products or stay connected with your audience using Squarespace email campaigns, which allow you to collect email subscribers and measure the impact of every, send all of this with best in class website templates that you can customize to fit your needs. Head to squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or Domain. When you use the custom u r l, you're also showing Squarespace how much you appreciate their support for our show. Again, that's squarespace.com/built.

ZipRecruiter (24m 50s):
If you're an entrepreneur looking to hire, you know that it's incredibly hard to attract top talent. That's why you wanna partner who gets it. And ZipRecruiter gets it. ZipRecruiter knows how tough it is right now, but they figured out solutions for the problems you are facing. You can see those solutions for yourself because right now you can try them for free At ziprecruiter.com/built. ZipRecruiter is ready to help you tackle your recruiting challenges. You can reach more of the right people because ZipRecruiter posts your job to 100 plus job sites. Team up with a hiring partner who understands what you need. ZipRecruiter, four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter, get a quality candidate within the first day. Just go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. ziprecruiter.com/built. And when you use that U r l, you're also showing ZipRecruiter how much you appreciate their support for our show. Again, that's ziprecruiter.com/b ui lt ZipRecruiter, the smartest way to hire.

3 (25m 59s):
One more thing before we get back to the show. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show.

0 (26m 7s):
It's usually just at the top of the app and it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 1988 and Henk is hooked on Tetris and trying to find out everything he can about it. Who owns it, who created it. And it turns out the inventor is this Russian computer guy at the Academy of Sciences and what was then the Soviet Union. Yeah.

3 (26m 43s):
So Alexey POV is his name, and he's a mathematician working mostly on voice recognition. And he needed to move to a new machine and he was assigned to learn how to program on that new machine. And he decided to make the pent amino puzzle. You get a little rectangle and you have to put the, the, the pieces into the rectangle and the last piece never fits. That's the pent amino puzzle. And he, and he realized that it was so slow that he, he started thinking about like, how can I make this, you know, faster? And then one of the things that he made is the routine to make the piece rotate.

3 (27m 27s):
And the rotation was so fast that it started making him think that he should make a real time game. Huh. And well, he just took one of the blocks off the pen amino puzzle and made them into Tetra Knows and, and you know, well that's basically Tetris, you know, the falling blocks.

0 (27m 47s):
And, and this game, I guess kind of was like wildfire in, in the Soviet Union, like office workers across the Soviet Union were like copying this, this game, like from floppy disc to floppy disc and playing it.

3 (27m 60s):
Yes. Basically they made the, the PC version and that's, that's what went viral. And it went viral to the point where they were losing prop productivity. I mean, it's like everybody

0 (28m 12s):
In the offices would play was playing Tetras. Right. Everywhere.

3 (28m 14s):
Everywhere. And it's like, yeah, you could say this, it could have been an insidious thing done by, by the West to stop people working in the Soviet Union. Ah,

0 (28m 25s):
It was like a western conspiracy to get people

3 (28m 27s):
To separate. It could easily have been. Right. But, you know,

0 (28m 30s):
And I, and I guess even like already in the mid eighties, people from outside the Soviet Union Westerners somehow discovered this game. It

3 (28m 39s):
Spread behind the Iron Curtain.

0 (28m 41s):
Hmm. Alright, so, so meanwhile, I guess you had learned that, that there were two different companies it, that sort of seemed to have the rights to Tetris. One was in England, it was called Moft and the other was in the US called Spectrum Holby. But I guess you thought that, that maybe you could get the license for Japan. Is that, is that what you were thinking?

3 (29m 5s):
Yeah, I was thinking, well first of all, I, I said, well I know Airsoft 'cause I've been to England also. Yeah. Looking for games. So I knew them. Then I got in contact with Moft and they said, you know, Gilman, Louie's coming to Japan, he's gonna deal the rights to Tetris. So talk to him. Fine. I knew Gilman Louie.

0 (29m 22s):
So this guy was a representative from, he

3 (29m 25s):
Was running Spectrum Hoby. Right. And they were sister company with Moft. So

0 (29m 28s):
He was coming to Japan to pedal this offer to see who, who would, who would be the highest bidder.

3 (29m 33s):
Yes. Gotcha. And I basically made him an offer for personal computers, for console and for arcade. Those are all the platforms I could think of in Japan. Yeah.

0 (29m 47s):
For the rights to get Tetris.

3 (29m 49s):
Yes. So yeah, we had a deal and two weeks later he calls me and he says, I'm really sorry, but the, you know, the deal that we did couldn't have been made because meanwhile Moft has given all those rights to Atari games. So I go, what? And you know, it was ridiculous. It was this like, they didn't need the Japanese rights for anything. 'cause they didn't have any business in Japan. And I, and boy, are you kidding me? I was livid. We had made a deal, you know, when you shake a deal, you know, it's like, this is a lawsuit. I, I didn't threaten him with the lawsuit. I said, we made a deal, Gilman.

3 (30m 28s):
And he, you know, sheepishly came back. He, he says, okay, I'll see what I can do. And what he, what he could do was he could get me the personal computer rights back. So I had personal computers.

0 (30m 44s):
You'd only have the rights to make a game in Japan for personal computers. Right. So floppy disc basically. Yes. But you wouldn't have the cons, rights or the arcade game rights. Right. Okay. So that was a consolation prize. Were you happy with that?

3 (30m 58s):
No, I want a Nintendo

0 (31m 1s):
You wanted the rights to put this on Nintendo. 'cause you, at that point Nintendo was really kind of a dominant con console.

3 (31m 8s):
Yes, it was. It was the way to make money. Right. It's a, you know, like personal computers, you can copy that stuff. Right. So there's only so much you can sell, but it But cartridges, you can't copy them. Yeah. If somebody wants to play a Nintendo game, they have to buy a Nintendo game.

0 (31m 25s):
But you did not have those rights. You only have the, the PC rights. Right.

3 (31m 29s):
Alright.

0 (31m 30s):
Alright. So I guess you decided to reach out to Atari because you've been told that they had the rights for Tetris on the console and and you want to buy those rights from, presumably from them, right? I mean, to, to publish the game in Japan. Oh yeah.

3 (31m 46s):
Then I started communicating directly with Atari games and said, look, I wanna license Tetris for the Japanese market. And I said to my team in Japan, I said, look, I'm going to the States. I'm not coming back until I have the Tetris writes. And so I, I went to San Jose, I met with the, with Nakajima, the president of Atari games and made my pitch why we should be the one to publish Tetris in Japan. And then it went radio silent. I was there for 10 days. And then I had my second meeting, I had dinner with, we had sushi. And he agreed,

0 (32m 24s):
He agreed to give you the rights to publish Tetris for consoles in Japan

3 (32m 30s):
For Nintendo. So it was very, very interesting. I think he must've needed money at this point. I think I, I made the, the deal for $300,000. It was a regular deal.

0 (32m 43s):
And the deal enabled you to have the license to sell the cartridges. Yes. For the Nintendo system. Okay. Yes. And that was in like 88.

3 (32m 52s):
Yeah, well it was, it was like probably September-ish. It takes two months to, to create the cartridges. So, you know, I was trying to make it in time for Christmas.

0 (33m 3s):
How did you finance making the cartridges? 'cause you had to pay Nintendo to, to, to manufacture them.

3 (33m 9s):
In the beginning, the, the orders weren't that big. The original order was 40,000 units, which is not enough. You need 200,000 units in order to get a second order. So that 40,000, and that was another reason for me to meet ya mochi, the head of Nintendo. So I miss Mr. Ya mochi. I don't know whether it's my sales or my marketing, that sucks, but I think I may have one of the greatest computer games of all time. And my salespeople could only get 40,000 units. And then he, he calls in Miyamoto, the creator of Mario and says, Miyamoto, is this a great game? And and Miyamoto says yes. And Ya much says, how do you know?

3 (33m 50s):
He says, because your accountants, your secretaries, all of you people are playing this game at lunch and after work when they, when they don't have to play games. And so Yai called in ii, who's the number two at Nintendos ii? I want you to pull distribution and make them order more. That's like, wow, that's some serious action there.

0 (34m 12s):
Wow. And that was simply because of his, his trusted lieutenant approved the game, liked the game.

3 (34m 19s):
Well there's that. And, and, and he liked me, I guess. I mean, why, why would he do something like that? Yeah,

0 (34m 24s):
You were his go buddy. Yeah,

3 (34m 25s):
I was his go buddy. Anyway, they called around and, and we got another 30,000. So it was like 70,000. It wasn't enough, still wasn't enough. But anyway, we published that Christmas 70,000 copies of Tetras on Nintendo.

0 (34m 40s):
Alright, so how did it do?

3 (34m 43s):
At first it was miserable because you can't look at the box and and understand what Tetris is. The only way that you can know what Tetris is, is by playing it. No, a no amount of advertising helps Tetris. Right? You have, you have to just play it. And so Right. Come January, it wasn't moving. Tetris wasn't moving. And what happens when, when they have product in January, like after Christmas, the distributors start dumping the rest of their inventory. Hmm. They have to get rid of it because Yeah. If it's not selling, it's never gonna sell.

0 (35m 18s):
Which means cut price, cut rate, price.

3 (35m 20s):
Yeah. And they're like, and, and I, my goodness, I had my sales guys call. Every distributor said, hang onto your inventory. This is not like other games. It is going to take off much more slowly than other games. But once it takes off, it's gonna be, you know, it's gonna be a hit. And some distributors actually listen to us. Well, by the end of January, Tetris was sold out everywhere. And

0 (35m 53s):
Based on what, how well

3 (35m 55s):
People started playing it, they just

0 (35m 57s):
Started to discover it.

3 (35m 58s):
It, yeah, it went viral. But at the end of January the orders started coming from distribution. They wanted more and this time they wanted 200,000 copies of Tetris. Wow. And it's like, wow, where am I gonna get the money to? That was more money than we, we could muster.

0 (36m 16s):
You went to finance printing or, or manufacturing 200,000 more cartridges.

3 (36m 21s):
Yeah. That's $2 million. So I convinced my wife to convince her parents to put up all of their real estate as collateral for a loan.

0 (36m 31s):
Seems like a pretty good gamble given that you had sold it out and people were kind of going crazy over it.

3 (36m 37s):
Yeah, yeah. No, it seemed like a slam dunk. Right. I mean, distri like the game had taken off. They were clamoring for it. So we just had to rush to get a, to get this stuff into production. And yeah, it's, it, I I saw no reason not to make that gamble, so to speak.

0 (36m 59s):
Alright, so Tetris is starting to take off on the Nintendo consoles in Japan. And by the way, were they, were they available on consoles in the us?

3 (37m 11s):
That would be later.

0 (37m 12s):
Okay. That would be later. So right now, this is just licensed in Japan. It's on the console, Nintendo console. In meantime, you catch wind of a new product that Nintendo is working on. And it, this is gonna be a handheld game system, which we now know and love as the Game boy. But how did you find out about that product?

3 (37m 34s):
You know, we are, we are in the business. So everybody in the business knew that Nintendo's gonna come out with this new machine. It wasn't like a big secret. Everybody in Japan knew about it. So when, when it was like gonna come out and we, and I saw the specs, I said, oh my God, this, this first of all, the screen is tiny. Second of all, it's all, it's black and white and it doesn't have many dots on the screen. So most games, you know, that are on, that are on console, are colorful and, and have a lot of detail. All that detail would be lost on the, on this tiny screen. But Tetris would work just perfectly.

0 (38m 14s):
Yeah. So the first thing I imagine is you go to Nintendo to pitch them on this idea.

3 (38m 20s):
Yeah, I did go to Redmond and pitch it to Awa

0 (38m 24s):
President of Nintendo America.

3 (38m 26s):
Yes.

0 (38m 27s):
Why did you have to go to Nintendo us? Right. Why not pitch it to Nintendo in Japan?

3 (38m 31s):
Because Nintendo US has a policy to include a game with every new hardware platform that they sell.

0 (38m 40s):
I see. So you thought, wait, if we can get this included with every game, boy slam dunk. It's like, it's like when you two released that record on every iPod, right? Everybody would have Tetris.

3 (38m 51s):
Yep. It would be an explosion. And it, it kind of was. So I went to, I went to Redmond and talked to Awa and I said, Mr. Awa, you should include Tetris with the Game Boy. And he said, why should I include Tetris? I have Mario

0 (39m 8s):
The greatest, greatest probably brand that they had at that point.

3 (39m 12s):
Yeah. And I said, If, you want little boys to buy your game, boy, then include Mario, but If, you want everyone to buy your game. Boy include Tetris. And then he calls in his experts and they all came and said, yep, you know, Tetris is being played by everybody. It's, it's completely genderless. You know, it's the first game that was being played by women.

0 (39m 35s):
Yeah.

3 (39m 35s):
Just by that alone. It could, you know, double the sales. And, and then I said, you know, and then you can still sell Mario afterwards. 'cause every kid's gonna wanna have Mario.

0 (39m 44s):
And that convinced him

3 (39m 46s):
And that convinced him.

0 (39m 48s):
So they agree to sell this with every game Boy. But then you still had more work to do. Right?

3 (39m 55s):
Well, of course I didn't have the rights for handheld.

0 (39m 58s):
And, and did they know that in Nintendo? Did they say, well, or did you have to say to them, look, I don't have the rights, but I'm gonna get them so let's just, you know. Yeah. I mean,

3 (40m 5s):
You know, I I I, part of my business strategy is I never lie to anybody. I never say I have something that I don't have. Right. You know, I, I, you know, I would say, I I can get you the rights. Right. And, and by that time, by the way, I had already hired Robert Stein to get me the handheld rights.

0 (40m 26s):
And, and, and I guess I, I, we haven't mentioned him, but he's, Robert Stein is kind of a, a key player in the story. 'cause he was this, this guy who early on negotiated with the Soviets to get the license for Tetris for, you know, for other companies overseas. And so I guess he, presumably he knew the, the right people in Russia. Like he knew where to go.

3 (40m 49s):
Right.

0 (40m 50s):
Okay. So you had hired him to be your agent in Moscow to get you the handheld rights to the game. That's

3 (40m 56s):
Right. That's right.

0 (40m 57s):
Okay. I got you. So you were fairly confident this is gonna be a pretty straightforward transaction. Yeah, yeah.

3 (41m 3s):
And I'd been faxing him, this all still the days of fax. I've been faxing him, you know, every week. Like, what's going on? When are you gonna get me the rights? And so on and so forth. And he just like, yeah, I'm gonna do it soon. I'm gonna do it soon. I'm gonna do it soon. And so that's kind of the situation I was in when it, it became February of, of 1989. So what, what what happened was AWA made me a deal. I made him an offer and he shook my hand. It was like a million dollar upfront, which is like, yeah, right on. Great deal. So you,

0 (41m 39s):
You would, he would pay you a million dollars upfront,

3 (41m 41s):
A million dollars up front. Okay. It was a dollar a unit for a million units. That was his minimum guarantee. Right. We shook hands on that. And then I am, I'm back in Japan and I'm like, now I'm really on, on Stein. Like, come on, we, we gotta get, let's this deal done. Let's, let's go, let's go. It turns out that Stein had to clear up the original contracts that he had. 'cause they were craft they were really bad, badly written contracts and you know, it was like, it was like taking candy from a baby kind of stuff. Yeah. The Soviets just didn't have any experience with intellectual property.

3 (42m 23s):
And here they were, you know, they were getting a percentage of a percentage of a percentage.

0 (42m 29s):
The Russians weren't getting anything.

3 (42m 31s):
They weren't getting anything.

0 (42m 32s):
But you were not getting, you were not getting enough communication or feedback from him. Yep. And it was making you nervous. And, and so you had to, you decided to take drastic action, I guess. Yeah,

3 (42m 42s):
I took drastic action. I, I got a tourist visa and went to Moscow myself

0 (42m 46s):
In, in February of 89. You fly to Moscow. This is like at the height of Glasnost, right?

3 (42m 54s):
Yeah. Well, parato and Glasnost were just starting to happen. So it wasn't the like going to North Korea today.

0 (43m 2s):
Right.

3 (43m 2s):
You know, it was already, people were already feeling a little bit of freedom.

0 (43m 7s):
Right. The Berlin Wall would come down several months later, but, but still, it was a time of liberalization.

3 (43m 13s):
Yes.

0 (43m 13s):
But you decided that you had to go there to figure out what was going on because you had no insight.

3 (43m 18s):
Well, I I, I, I needed to get there before Stein licensed it to Muralsoft or somebody else. Yeah.

0 (43m 28s):
Right. Because then you would lose the opportunity to have Tetris on every game. Boy,

3 (43m 34s):
I would, yeah. I would l I would, I'd be losing out on the million dollar deal, come on. Right,

0 (43m 38s):
Right. So you get to Moscow in February of 1989, and of course that's where Tetris was invented by Alexey. By Alexey pov. Right. And he was like a software guy who worked for the, for the government. Like he didn't, he didn't have the rights to the game. Right. But, but there was this one Soviet organization that you, I guess you could maybe talk to about the rights. And it was, it was called like eor or eor?

3 (44m 6s):
Yes, electronic Ortecha.

0 (44m 9s):
Okay. And it was, it was the Soviet organization that oversaw software and hardware exports, I guess.

3 (44m 16s):
Yeah. Export imports. I, I don't exactly know what, but they were, they were definitely the ones that had the power to speak to people outside.

0 (44m 25s):
Hmm. So, so what happened when you went to Moscow and showed up there at El at Ellor? You, like, you walk into the lobby and, and, and you say, what?

3 (44m 35s):
Well, it's before be it is before this. Okay. I'm, I'm outside the door. And, and my interpreter says, you can't go in there. I said, what do you mean I can't go in there? I said, we, you need to, you, you have a tourist visa, you can't go in there. I said, I said, look, I didn't come all this way to stand in front of a door and go back to Japan, get a Visa and then come back. No, that's not how it works. I'm going in, are you coming with me? No, I can't. It's like, okay, fine. I'm going in. And I went in and it's a, it's a lobby of, you know, office building kind of place and there's a, the window off to the side, you could see that's the window where you're supposed to present your credentials.

0 (45m 15s):
Yeah.

3 (45m 16s):
Well, obviously I didn't have any credentials, so I didn't go to that window. I just stood there in the, in the lobby and waded for somebody to speak to me. Yeah. So it took a while, but, you know, maybe like, I don't know, 10 minutes. Finally somebody came and talked to me, talked to me, and she said, what are you looking for? And I, in English, she asked you In English? Yes. In English. And so I showed her, I'm the publisher of this game. I'm Tetris and I'm looking for, someone talked to me about the Game Boy rights. And, and she said, okay, wait here. And she disappeared. And, and a little while later comes down the stairs, come this old man.

3 (45m 56s):
And that's, that was Mr. Bekoff.

0 (45m 58s):
And who is Mr. Bekoff?

3 (45m 60s):
Well, I didn't know who he was at the time. I had no idea who anybody was, but Mr. Bekoff would be the one that I would negotiate this whole deal with.

0 (46m 11s):
So he comes down, was he mad? Was he puzzled? Was he

3 (46m 14s):
No, he was, he was warm, he was puzzled, you know, hello? And you know, who are you? What do you want? And I said, I'm the publisher of this game in Japan. And he took the Tetris cartridge box into his hand. And, and he looked at it and looked at it and he looked at me and he said, we never licensed console rights to anyone.

0 (46m 41s):
You showed him a cart, a Nintendo cartridge of Tetris. And he said, you don't have the rights to this.

3 (46m 45s):
Nobody has the rights to this.

0 (46m 47s):
Did he even know what it was? Did he know what a Nintendo system was?

3 (46m 50s):
Kind of. I think he figured it out pretty quickly. I, I don't know if I described it. He, to

0 (46m 54s):
Him, he wasn't for a pc. That's

3 (46m 55s):
Right.

0 (46m 56s):
And so, so did he say, come into my office? Like, let's

3 (46m 59s):
Talk No, no, no, no, no, no, no. That's, no, no. That's, I did not ho know who he was. And I did not want to just talk to an underling. I wanted to talk to somebody who could make a decision. And so I said, I will come back tomorrow. I would like to meet someone to talk about the, the, the game Boy rights. But you, you, you missed the point. Just now I'm standing there and he's just told me that my, that I don't have the right to publish the 200,000 cartridges. Mm.

0 (47m 32s):
And and by the way, to be clear, you, you thought you already had those rights. They were for the, the console, which you, you would like leverage the, the $2 million for.

3 (47m 44s):
Yes. So I'm in the middle of that. They're already in manufacture. I'm not gonna get my money back. If somebody else swoops in and gets those rights, I am totally screwed. Yeah. And so I I You could

0 (47m 58s):
Destroy those games. Yeah,

3 (47m 60s):
Exactly. And so I, I, I decided I'm gonna focus on the Game Boy deal. Let me, let me do that one thing, which is absolutely clear. And it says, I'll come back tomorrow. So he said, yes, come back tomorrow at one o'clock, whatever. And the reason I wanted it to be the next day is 'cause I wanted him to have the right people in the room. Right. And then the next day in the room, eight people and me, I was being interrogated, who are you? What are you doing? And you know, I'm a Dutchman who sounds like an American who has a publishing company in Japan Publishing, you know, game that he claims to have licensed from.

0 (48m 45s):
Did they, were they, did they seem hostile? Like, hey, how, like, like sort of looking at you like you were a thief. Like you had stolen this, the rights to this.

3 (48m 54s):
Yeah, it was very strange. Yeah. They were very suspicious. Yeah. I mean, who the hell am I

0 (49m 3s):
When we come back in just a moment, a secret shot of vodka to celebrate a deal and Henk starts a new company with the one guy who hasn't made a dime of Tetris. It's inventor. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

Enbridge (49m 28s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it tomorrow. Sounds like hydrogen being added to natural gas to make it more sustainable. It sounds like solar panels generating thousands of megawatts and it sounds like carbon being captured and stored, keeping it out of our atmosphere. We've been bridging to a sustainable energy future for more than 20 years because what we do today helps ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge. Life takes energy.

Instacart (49m 59s):
I started shopping for my weekly groceries through Instacart because with young kids, my week is pretty packed. There's TaeKwonDo tap lessons and endless birthday parties. But with Instacart I can get groceries and weekly essentials delivered in as fast as an hour, which gives me time back to fulfill my duties as my kid's full-time chauffeur. Let's go visit Instacart dot ca to get free delivery on your first three orders. Offer valid for a limited time minimum $10 per order. Additional terms, apply Instacart, add life to cart.

0 (50m 38s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. So it's early 1989 and Henk Rogers is in Moscow hoping to get the rights to publish Tetris on the Game Boy. And he's sitting in the one Soviet office where he might be able to negotiate that ior, which oversees the export of computer software. Trouble is the meeting feels more like an interrogation. And then Henk learns that one of the people in the room is Alexey pov, the inventor of Tetris.

3 (51m 11s):
He had to be in the room because he's the only one in the room who knew anything about computer games besides me. Those guys, a lot of them had had no clue. All they understood was was money license, you know, that kind of stuff. They didn't understand what a game was.

0 (51m 28s):
So when you met Alexey, was were you like, such an honor to meet you? I love your game. I mean, do you remember what, what you said to her?

3 (51m 37s):
Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Oh, absolutely. I'm, I'm, I'm in love with your game. You're, you, you've created something amazing. And you know, it's, it's very interesting because Alexey, I, you know, and I talked to him about the game and Alexey, that was the thing that flipped him because he'd never met a game designer before. I was the first game designer that he met. He'd met other people like Robert Stein, who wanted, you know, were Wheeler dealers and trying to license, but they weren't game designer. I was a game designer. Mm.

0 (52m 13s):
So you, so you had to untangle. So this conversation really, you had to be, begin by untangling the facts, figuring out what happened because as far as you were concerned, you had the legitimate rights to this. But they probably wanted to understand what happened. And you had to start to say, well, there's this guy Stein, and they probably knew Stein. And so this must have been a very complicated conversation. Well,

3 (52m 37s):
Okay. So I had to explain to them how the whole business works. I basically taught them everything they needed to know about what the computer game, what's the difference between console and, and personal computer and arcade, and how each of these things made money and how the, I, I basically explained everything to them.

0 (52m 58s):
And there was somebody in the room translating everything you were saying. They,

3 (53m 1s):
They were, for those that weren't, that didn't speak English. Yeah. They, they would stop every once in a while and go into Russian whatever discussion. Yeah. Yeah. And it's funny because when they, when they get into a discussion, sometimes it sounds like they're fighting.

0 (53m 17s):
Right.

3 (53m 18s):
And it's like, are they talking, like, try trying to decide which Gulag they're gonna send me to. Is that what they're, it was kind of creepy, you know, because they're arguing with each other. And then they would come back and start speaking English to me again.

0 (53m 33s):
So you start to explain all this to them and at the end of the, the what it was a couple hours, presumably at the end of it, were they like, oh, okay, we get it now. Thank you so much for explaining this.

3 (53m 46s):
Well, they visibly relaxed and they said, okay, make us an offer

0 (53m 53s):
For, for what?

3 (53m 54s):
Yeah. It's, first of all, they asked me, so Mr. Rogers, when do you plan to come back to Moscow? And I said, what do you mean come back to Moscow? I, they said, well, you know, we have to think about this and, and make our decision. And I said, that's not how it works when I leave here, I either leave here with the Game Boy rights or I leave here without the Game Boy rights, but I'm not coming back. Huh. That's, I I started realizing that I have to be forceful with them 'cause they're forceful with each other. You know what I'm saying? Like, there's not a like warm and fuzzy nice like con conversation. No, it's, it's all kind of adversarial. They were that way with each other.

3 (54m 35s):
So the nice started reeling. I have to be that way too. And so they, they, they said, well, make us an offer. I said, okay. I went back to my hotel and I made a little one page legalese document and I presented to them the next day and I gave them a week. And we managed to hammer out a agreement within that week. And I, the offer that I'd made them was I would pay them 25 cents for every game Boy Tetris that was sold. And I'd, you know, we'd, we'd sort of like on the back of the envelope, how many units will Nintendo sell that include Tetris?

3 (55m 20s):
And that number was something like 30 million. So 30 million times 25 cents is a big number. Hmm.

0 (55m 27s):
So If you sold 10 million units, they'd get two and a half million dollars, basically.

3 (55m 32s):
Exactly.

0 (55m 33s):
Okay. And I mean, in today's terms, it doesn't sound like a lot of money, but that was, that's, that was a lot of money back then.

3 (55m 39s):
That was, and that was an impossibly huge amount of money for them. Right.

0 (55m 44s):
I got you. Okay. So you were taking a gamble, but you knew that this game was already taking off in Japan and that you already had the agreement from Nintendo, u s a to put it with every Game Boy sold as a bundled game. Those included. Yep.

3 (55m 59s):
Yep.

0 (55m 60s):
So they agreed and you were there and took you about a week to make this deal?

3 (56m 3s):
Yeah, next Friday they, we, we signed a deal. We broke Gorbachev rule, which has no, no alcohol in the office. And we broke out a bottle of vodka and all had a shot. And they posted people by the doors and the windows to make sure nobody was watching. And so after I signed the contract, lockdown, handheld, Mr. Bekoff asks me, Mr. Rogers, how would you like to license the console rights? And like, wow, that sounds Yes, of course.

0 (56m 40s):
And and of course he could offer you that because as he already told you, nobody owned the Cons rights at the time. Right. Not, not you or Atari or Nintendo. No one,

3 (56m 50s):
Nobody.

0 (56m 51s):
Okay. And, and at this point, this all gets a little complicated and, and sort of tied up in, in, in legal red tape. But I guess eventually when all was said and done, you, you made out pretty well, you secured the rights for a Nintendo in Japan, and then you also had the rights, the worldwide rights to Tetris on the Game Boy, right? Yeah,

3 (57m 14s):
Absolutely.

0 (57m 15s):
And what happened when, when Tetris was shipped off with the Game Boys?

3 (57m 19s):
Oh, they end up doing 30 million,

0 (57m 22s):
30 million.

3 (57m 24s):
30 million packed in and another 5 million as, as just sold as a box product. Wow.

0 (57m 31s):
And, and meanwhile, I mean, in the early 1990s, the Soviet Union dissolves, right? That's right. And, and so a lot of these kind of government organizations get privatized and, and ALO becomes a private company and Alexey the, the inventor of the game, he actually had to make a deal with them, I guess, that in 1995 he would finally get the rights. Well, the rights would revert back to him, right?

3 (58m 0s):
Yes.

0 (58m 1s):
Because he had made, he had not made a dime off Tetris at this point. The guy, right. He'd made not made a cent,

3 (58m 6s):
Not a cent.

0 (58m 7s):
All that, all the money was going to the Soviet agency and who knows who was, who was skimming off the top. Right. Right.

3 (58m 14s):
Exactly. So all the people who, who, who ended up, like, how did Beov go from being an administrator of a government organization to owning it?

0 (58m 27s):
Right.

3 (58m 28s):
How did, how did that happen? Yeah. I remember there was a very interesting moment in time when it was just the transition when it became a private company. And it was Mr. Beov called me up in a panic and he said, you know, the, the money that you cabled me, can you like get it back and then send it to this new bank account?

0 (58m 50s):
Yes. To the attention of ov. Yeah. So Alexia had anticipated this all and they were gonna put up a fight 'cause there's some real money to be made. Yep. And and how did you manage to prevent that from happening? And

3 (59m 7s):
Which is why Alexia asked me to help him, and it's 93. And he said, look, I'm gonna make you an offer. You're gonna represent me. You're gonna take care of me, and you and me are gonna be partners. And basically made me offer, offer. And we shook ends in, in 93, that that handshake is still alive today.

0 (59m 28s):
Okay. He said, you get a cut, I'll get a cut, but I want you to be in charge of resting the rights away from these, all

3 (59m 38s):
These Well, he, I'm not resting the right. He, I want you to, to make sure that I get my, my rights back. Right. But anyway, during 95, the Lord came, we had the meeting in Redmond and, and I was ready to, I mean, I was representing Alexia. I was ready to give them 20% and they were ready to give me 20%. You know, so it was, we were very far apart. Wow.

0 (1h 0m 1s):
You were far away. Yeah. Okay.

3 (1h 0m 2s):
Very far apart. And I remember being in a room, and it is all Nintendo lawyers, and then there's Mr. Bekoff and his lawyer. And I said, well, I'm not a, I'm not a lawyer, but I, I, I kind of feel that at some point there, there's gonna be a jury and of Americans that are gonna decide who owns the rights to Tetris, whether it's the former Soviet ministry of Import and export of software or the creator of the game. So what

0 (1h 0m 34s):
Happened?

3 (1h 0m 35s):
So basically I start hammering out the deal with, with Beov, and we end up making a, making The Tetris Company. And it's 50 50. That's, you know, because because they had, they had the copyright and trademark in 60 countries and that would just too much for me to try to fight. So,

0 (1h 0m 53s):
So they would own half of the rights and you and, and Alexey would own the other half essentially. That was the agreement you made.

3 (1h 0m 59s):
That's how we divide the money. So basically we just decided to, I don't know, call it, call it truth. Yeah.

0 (1h 1m 7s):
So now you have an incentive to expand the brand because you own 50% of it. Like If, you were just a licensee. You have no incentive to make it better because you're essentially, they own the ip. And so you're like, well, why are we gonna make it better? You,

3 (1h 1m 20s):
You understand it. Exactly. And I said, look, before we split the money, I'm gonna need the money to brand manage this game. And so I want a percentage off the top to do all of the licensing and to do all of the brand management. The problem was that up till then, everybody who licensed Tetris from a Logue basically had no, no guide about how to build Tetris. And so the versions of Tetris that came out of different publishers were very different. Give you an example, A game boy player in Japan could not play the arcade because the, it's like the brakes and the gas pedal were reversed.

3 (1h 2m 4s):
Yeah. So it was my job to standardize Tetris across all platforms. And we, we've done that, but seven years into it, BEOV team got greedy and they said, well, we don't actually want you to do brand management, we just wanna find somebody to license Tetris because, because we don't wanna pay you for to doing brand management without understanding that that brand management is really, really important.

0 (1h 2m 31s):
Yeah. They wanted to stop paying you the fee to manage it. Yeah. And, and, and that presumably created another conflict.

3 (1h 2m 39s):
Yeah. That created a conflict. And in all of the deals up till then, the way it worked is I get one vote, BEOV gets one vote. If it's Yes, yes. Then it's a, it's a deal. If it's yes no, then it's no deal. So basically at that point for the next three years, no deals went through because every deal that I brought to the table, he said no. Wow. And every deal that he brought to the table, I said no,

0 (1h 3m 2s):
Which was impossible and, and untenable. So you, you had to figure out either to buy them out or for them to buy you out and they were probably not gonna buy you out.

3 (1h 3m 10s):
Yeah. So during that, during those three years, I was, I had gotten a license to Tetris for mobile phones in the US and I was, I hid it outta the park in the US Huh? I made a company called Blue Lava Wireless. Right. And I, I basically published Tetris and, and other games

0 (1h 3m 33s):
And I I read that you guys are doing like more than $20 million in sales.

3 (1h 3m 38s):
Right, exactly. And that's, I don't know, 50% profit. But at the end of three years, my license ran out. And during that three years, we were Beko and, and me, we were, we were duking it out. We are, we are in court. I'm a, I'm a on the way to proving that he has no rights at all in New York. Wow. And so we were on that. We were on the way.

0 (1h 4m 1s):
And, and, and meanwhile there's this company jammed at that comes along and, and offers to buy blue level wireless and, and, and obtain a license to Tetris. But what was their incentive to buy it if your license for, for mobile was about to expire?

3 (1h 4m 20s):
Yeah, so what I had to do is I had to collect the worldwide rights to Tetris on mobile into Blue Lava Wireless. And in order to do that, I had to get rid of Beko. So, so I raised the money to buy out Beko.

0 (1h 4m 35s):
You raised the money to buy out, to buy out the former IOR guys or the current, they were still called aor I think, but that was a private company.

3 (1h 4m 42s):
Yep. I ended up buying them. I own AOR now.

0 (1h 4m 46s):
So now with them outta the picture with the A lord guys outta the picture, you own, you and Alexey owned a hundred percent of this company. Yes.

3 (1h 4m 53s):
And the company that I sold blew Lava Wireless. What I did was I gave that company a 15 year license to Tetris from The, Tetris Company. So we never lost ownership of Tetris.

0 (1h 5m 6s):
And they bought you guys out for like $130 million. They paid a lot of money. Yeah.

3 (1h 5m 11s):
They paid a lot of money. It's good.

0 (1h 5m 13s):
So, alright, so this happens 2005, you're free and clear. You get, you sell blue lava, you've finally, you own, you know, you guys own Tetris and like a month later you get a massive heart attack. You're playing golf and you like near death. Like, like you were just on the edge of death.

3 (1h 5m 33s):
Yeah, it was actually tennis. The endless driver said that he didn't think I was gonna make it.

0 (1h 5m 38s):
Wow.

3 (1h 5m 39s):
When I got to the hospital, they rolled me straight into the, or I was still conscious. I signed the paper saying, yes, you can operate. Which is nice because if I, if I couldn't sign, my wife would've had to sign. She didn't know where I was.

0 (1h 5m 54s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 5m 55s):
So I would've, I would've died. Wow. I have two stents. I have two stents, but in that, in that ambulance on the way to the hospital, the first thing I thought of, you gotta be kidding me. I haven't spent any of the money yet.

0 (1h 6m 8s):
I made all this money and I'm about to die. You're

3 (1h 6m 10s):
Gonna take me out. I said, the second thing I said, no, I'm not going. I still have stuff to do. And so, you know, in the recovery room, I started thinking about, what did I mean by that

0 (1h 6m 21s):
Before you, you tell me about that. Were you, I mean, I mean I've talked to you, I've seen you, you seem like a pretty healthy guy. I mean, was it just the stress and the lifestyle of just grinding for all those years that led you to that point? Were you not living a healthy life or were you just genetically predisposed to it or what

3 (1h 6m 40s):
The doctor said, don't change a thing. Hmm. Don't change your exercise. Don't change your diet, you're fine. This is an anomaly. Hmm. So, yeah, I mean, I mean, you could say that it was stress and all this kind of stuff, but I, I just generally don't take stress. Maybe I do and I just don't realize it, but I'm, I'm pretty relaxed about things. Wow.

0 (1h 7m 5s):
Alright. So this happens and you've achieved success, financial success, and yet, like you were in near death, you must have had some big thoughts I would imagine, Henk.

3 (1h 7m 18s):
Yeah. Well, I, I kind of worked it back from the end of my life. You know, I, I I thought about what is it that's gonna upset me if I didn't do something by the end of my real life the next time. And I found my bucket list I, I searched for and found my missions in life.

0 (1h 7m 35s):
Tell me what you start to think.

3 (1h 7m 37s):
Well, the first one came to me in the back of the newspaper. It's it's head, oh, by the way, we're gonna kill all the coral in the world by the end of the century. That's causing, that is ocean acidification. What's causing that? It's carbon dioxide. What's causing that? We are, so, mission number one is to end the use of carbon based fuel. And I started a foundation in Hawaii called the Blue Planet Foundation, and we work to end the use of carbon based fuel in Hawaii.

0 (1h 8m 3s):
So you decide that you're going to devote your life to environmental causes. That, that, that it was, you were moving away from video game. I mean, you still own the license at Tetris, but you were gonna shift your focus on climate change causes issues.

3 (1h 8m 18s):
Well, it's not just climate change. I have four missions, but yeah,

0 (1h 8m 21s):
Please tell me what the, tell me what they are. Yeah.

3 (1h 8m 23s):
First mission is to end the use of carbon based fuel. Second one is to end war, which is, goes back to when I was a student in high school. It's

0 (1h 8m 30s):
Ambitious, but I, I, okay. I like it. And

3 (1h 8m 33s):
Number three is to make a backup of life by going to other planets and bringing life to other planets. I like it. And, and number four is to find out how the universe ends and do something about it. Hmm. I think the reason that the last one exists is to make the other ones seem reasonable when they're, they could seem unreasonable. Yeah. Okay. So in the scope of things compared to the end of the universe, you know, fixing climate change is just a blip. Yeah. And I just like this blip to happen faster. And I, to me, people ask me if I have hope, I say, no, I don't have hope, I have determination because we're gonna fix this. There's no doubt in my mind that we're gonna fix this.

3 (1h 9m 14s):
How much damage we do to this planet on the way to fixing it, that's up to us. Mm.

0 (1h 9m 20s):
So Henk I mean, when you, when you think about, you know, the, the journey you took, I mean, you know, from sort of kind of jewelry guy with your dad and, you know, kind of building this, this game company and then coming across Tetris and really making a gamble. Right. Putting a lot of emotional energy and time into the, into the, this game and, and risking a lot in, in, you know, believing in it into where you are now. I mean, obviously, or you know, you made a lot of money off of this and, and now you can deploy that money for some of the causes. You, you are, you know, are committed to. How much of, of where you are now do you think is, is because of, of how hard you worked and your, your intelligence and how much do you attribute to luck?

3 (1h 10m 8s):
Oh, it's, it's old because of hard work. I mean, this is not like I rolled a dice and something happened. I like to compare it to surfing. I used to, I used to surf and basically, you know, some day a giant wave is gonna come and If, you haven't surfed the small waves and worked and worked and paddled and paddled and, and, and learned all that stuff. Then when that big wave comes up, you're just gonna get killed. The, the, the, you need to know how to surf before you, you know, and you can't read about it in a book. This is, you've gotta get out in the water and try stuff.

0 (1h 10m 49s):
Yeah. By the way, is Alexey still involved with the company? Is he just kind of a, is he kind of a passive owner in a sense? Well,

3 (1h 10m 57s):
He is as involved as I am. So whenever something comes up, we both have to agree to a license. That's the way it is now. So we, we look at, at every deal we still go to, like, we were just in Vegas at the licensing show. So we are merchandising to all kinds of brands that, that want to use. Tetris on, I don't know, shoes, backpacks, cups, who knows? So there's that whole side of the business that we're still involved in.

0 (1h 11m 29s):
And Alexey lives in the United States now, right?

3 (1h 11m 32s):
Yes, he does. You know, and if we're in the same jurisdiction, like if we're both in Seattle or both in New York, every other night, bottle of wine, guaranteed. We worked hard to keep Tetris alive. People ask me if I'm Mr. Tetris, I said, no, I'm Dr. Tetris. Alexia is Mr. Tetris. I'm Dr. Tetris. We're best friends forever. That's the way it is.

0 (1h 11m 56s):
That's Henk Rogers co-founder of The, Tetris Company. And by the way, even though he and Alexey are no longer running it, it is still pretty much in the family.

3 (1h 12m 7s):
My daughter runs it now. So she, she takes care of the whole thing. My daughter Maya, she, when she was 15, she asked me, so I asked her, what do you want to be when you grow up? And she said, I don't know, but I wanna make more money than you. So she's on it.

0 (1h 12m 25s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. This episode was produced by Sam Paulson, with music composed by Tine Arablouei and Sam Paulson. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Catherine Cipher. Our audio engineer was Gilly Moon. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Alexey Chung, Carrie Thompson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members.

0 (1h 13m 17s):
You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If, you wanna show your support for our show? Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Viking Cruises (1h 13m 44s):
This message comes from Viking, committed to exploring the world in comfort journey through the heart of Europe on a Viking long ship with thoughtful service, destination focused dining and cultural enrichment on onboard and onshore with a variety of voyages and sailing dates to choose from. Now is the time to explore Europe's waterways. Learn more@viking.com.