NPR Podcasts (0s):
What's happening with NPR podcasts, more shows, issues, ideas, stories, flavors, and personalities, and you can shake a stick. Why are we whisper the more of the world that you hear, the more you hear the world as it really is. So come experience more neighborhoods or identities or species, more perspectives, NPR, podcasts, more voices, all ears. Find NPR, wherever you get your podcasts,

Klaviyo (30s):
Ready to turn your small e-commerce business into the next big thing. Klaviyo can help. It's the easy to use email and SMS platform that gives you everything you need to build genuine relationships with your customers. And even if you're new to marketing Klaviyo can help you become an email expert with drag and drop design templates, simple insights, and made for e-commerce reports and recommendations. Give it a try with a free account at klaviyo.com/built. That's K L a V I Y o.com/built

Figs (1m 5s):
Figs is on a mission to make awesome scrubs suited for the awesome humans. Working in healthcare. Forget boxy itchy cotton scrubs figs are engineered to be ridiculously soft and incredibly durable. Plus they're functional using their innovative technical comfort technology, fig splints, comfort style, and durability into high-performance scrubs that help you perform at your best. Whatever the day throws at you. Figs are functional modern scrubs with a focus on design function and comfort figs believes that awesome humans in healthcare deserve scrubs that match had to aware figs.com and use code Wondery to get 15% off your first order. That's w E a R F I G s.com code Wondery for 15% off. Your first order,

3 (1m 57s):
Conan O'Brien was promised to take over the tonight show. And so I was leaving and Lauren goes, would you ever want to host a late night? You know, cause you could take over Conan and in six years and we were kind of laughing and I asked my wife, she goes, are you kidding? Yes, you have to do this. You're on the list. There's David Letterman, Conan O'Brien and you that's it that's amazing list to be on. You have to, without a doubt. And so I said, I called Lauren to go, yes, I want to do this. And he's like, okay, great. Now I just got to convince NBC,

1 (2m 38s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how Jimmy Fallon dreamed of a career in comedy and became an icon of late night TV with a side hustle is a serial entrepreneur. A few years ago, I received a call from a producer on the tonight show. She wanted to know if I could come to New York the next week and appear as a guest.

1 (3m 18s):
Once I cut through my minor panic and heart palpitations, I asked why me well to my great surprise and delight, she told me Jimmy Fallon was a fan of the show. It turns out he's obsessed with stories about founders over the years, I've had a few more opportunities to come on his show and talk about some of the founders we've had on this show. And usually Jimmy pitches me on a bunch of his business ideas. He's wanting to make toaster waffles embedded with emojis, cheese slices shaped like circles. So they fit better on hamburgers and even vitamins. And I dropped for him and some of his ideas have turned into real products.

1 (3m 59s):
For example, if you wear glasses, you might find yourself fidgeting with them from time to time, twirling them around by the arms. Jimmy invented a pair of glasses where the hinge is on a ball-bearing that twirls and Warby Parker actually produced them all the proceeds like most of the products Jimmy sells or endorses go to charity. Anyway, one of the things I noticed about Jimmy and the tonight show crew is that it is an incredibly well-oiled machine, but more importantly, every single person associated with the show, whether it was a page who brought me up the elevator to the security team at check-in to the bookers, to the segment, producers, to the makeup crew, to Jimmy himself, each person is incredibly kind like so kind.

1 (4m 48s):
You notice it and that's not by accident. The person you see on TV every night, delivering a monologue or dressing up as a character and singing or playing a game with a celebrity. He really seems to be exactly that person off-screen as well. Jimmy Fallon is interested in the people he talks to. He almost always has a story to tell and he's usually laughing and he happens to have built an incredible brand around his personality. Even if it wasn't intentional or part of a plan. Jimmy Fallon is now one of the most important drivers of revenue for NBC and outside of his relentless job. As host of the tonight show, he somehow manages to run a production company that produces several TV shows.

1 (5m 33s):
He writes children's books, records music, and is constantly coming up with new business ideas. Like all the people I've had on the show, Jimmy Fallon is an entrepreneurial thinker. He's restless, always needing to create something new. But as a kid, he was also super focused almost hyper-focused on one unwavering goal to one, become a cast member on Saturday night live. He even knew the name of the executive producer, Lauren Michaels. Jimmy grew up in the seventies and eighties in upstate New York in a middle-class Irish, Catholic family, and early on in order to learn everything he could about comedy and performing.

1 (6m 16s):
He invested in some serious high-end technology

3 (6m 20s):
Crush Hills. We're like a happening thing in the eighties. And so I went to a discretion on a buddy reel to reel recorder, a tiny one. And you know, you could record with a real it's real for hours. So I would record radio shows. I would record TV. I would record Senator it live. So if it was on and I was awake or watching it, I would record, you know, Steve Martin's monologue on a reel-to-reel and then I'd have it. And so I could listen to it again and like memorize it and lip sync it or perform it or pretend I'm Steve Martin and go, Hey, okay, again, and now I'm going to do this, you know, and I want to like, actually sound like him where, or do him, or do Richard Pryor, you know, imitate exactly his joke in his timing.

3 (7m 7s):
And that was like basically owning records, but I didn't have to spend the money on records. I could just tape it off the one speaker on my Heath kit, television set.

1 (7m 16s):
What are you comfortable? Like just getting up in front of people, your parents, friends, kids at school, onstage at school and just performing,

3 (7m 25s):
You know, I wasn't really, I I'm trying to remember where it actually kind of flipped over, but I mean like our grandparents used to live in our backyard. Well, not like in the yard and it's a

1 (7m 38s):
Little house.

3 (7m 38s):
Yeah. We had, they had been in a cage, we'd throw food at them. They would live, they had a little cottage kind of in the back, tiny, tiny.

1 (7m 47s):
So

3 (7m 47s):
We'd have parties all the time. There's a lot of drinking and singing and crying and a lot of entertaining. Everyone would get up and sing something. You know, my parents would say, Hey, would you, you and Gloria go do something or sing a song? Or do you have anything you want to, you know,

1 (8m 2s):
Gloria is your sister.

3 (8m 4s):
Yeah. So we would perform. And we would do these, the Seren live check brothers, not even knowing what the jokes meant,

5 (8m 10s):
Cruise for them on our tight slacks, which give us grit the ball jazz.

3 (8m 16s):
We would be dressing like the disco east outfits, you know, from my dad's closet or my mom's closet and hats, floppy hats. We are two wild and crazy guys. Anyway, we have to go to statue of Liberty to get the birth control devices

5 (8m 33s):
That told us that in America, many American park Rangers distribute the birth control devices.

3 (8m 39s):
And my grandmother be like, what are they talking? What are they saying? And we didn't know what that meant. I thought it was like a robot thing or something, a device like a birth control device. I didn't know what jokes, what we were just doing. And we were getting laughs. So that was kind of a thing. Then, you know, I got into Rodney Dangerfield, you know, at an early age and I would put on one of my dad's ties and I would just do his act. My wife's cooking so bad. You know, this is a 10 year old kid talking to Castillo my wife. Oh, her cooking is so best since when it's toast of bones, you know, all right. I think my parents would give me like a dollar, you know, or my grandparents would give me 50 cents to do it, you know?

1 (9m 19s):
Yeah. I wonder. I mean, cause you can make an, you can make an analogy between a kid who's just really talented at a basketball or baseball and, and there are kids like Mike trout was an amazing youth baseball player, right? Like, like Bryce Harper, people knew that at the time, did anybody, when you were 10, 11, 12, say to you or your parents, he's really talented like this, this is not just funny, fun. Like there's something here.

3 (9m 44s):
I don't know. You know, I don't think so. I remember I got some, a report card once it said I smiled too much, which is hilarious to me. He doesn't take things serious. I think they were kind of was their point or something. Cause I would just, I would just laugh if someone said something to me, I think. But I do remember that report card coming back and like what a weird thing for someone to say, I think it was kindergarten who would ever say your kid smiles too much, but that was a real actual report from my teacher. I do remember graduating from eighth grade. My yearbook said, and this is true. I can, if you can believe me over this podcast, I can somehow get a photo to you somehow.

3 (10m 26s):
Or maybe I'll tweet it when this airs, but it said most likely to replace David Letterman.

1 (10m 32s):
Amazing. Yeah. In eighth

3 (10m 34s):
Grade, eighth grade. And it's like, unless Nostradamus was my principal, you know, who would know, but no one ever said, Hey, he has a future. We didn't do that in our town. I mean, no one knew that you could get out of the, your goals were kind of, I'm going to do what my dad does or something or what my mom does. But IBM was really the only thing happening in our little town. And so that was kind of a lot of people's goals to work at. IBM.

1 (11m 2s):
So I want to ask you about doing stand-up comedy because that's where you would kind of start your career. Right. And I think you started doing it pretty early. How did you get into stand up?

3 (11m 14s):
Stand up. I started in, in like my senior year in high school, there was a radio contest of who can do the funniest impression in the Hudson valley. And my mom heard about this on the radio and she said, she came up to my room. She was like, you, I wrote this down, you have to do this contest because I hear all the voices you do in your room and you blah, blah, blah. And I go, okay, let's, let's, let's do it. I'll I'll enter this contest. And you know, if she believed in me, you know, and I was 17 at the time, I think I had one minute to do any impression. And instead I wanted to make to as impressions as I could in one minute, I think I ended up doing like 10 impressions, you know, bill Cosby, Casey Qassem Bullwinkle, John Travolta, you know, and I was basing it all off.

3 (12m 5s):
Someone gave me a troll doll as a graduation gift, like a good luck class of 1992. And it was a troll doll holding a diploma. And I thought it was very nice, but also what am I going to do with this doll? You know? And so I remember doing different celebrities, auditioning for a commercial for troll dolls. So I would do Travolta and go like,

6 (12m 28s):
She's like, you know, like who does his hair? Like what kind of dog is this? You know, his arms and legs don't meet.

3 (12m 35s):
And I remember at the time I was in the Bullwinkle and so I did Bullwinkle saying like, these

6 (12m 41s):
Tools are nice, but I'd rather play with

3 (12m 43s):
Myself or something like that. And then I pulled out a Bullwinkle doll and I go, well, you know what I mean? You know, I'll play with the doll. And then I go next up Pee-wee Herman. And it was right when the scandal was coming out and I closed with Peewee going, ah,

6 (12m 58s):
I know what you mean. I like to play with myself too.

3 (13m 3s):
And I did that and that was my closer. And it was like topical, edgy, you know, all at one minute. And it's like, woo. I had a solid minute. And I ended up winning the contest. And then I got the bug that the comedy club bananas and Poughkeepsie, New York, they said, would you come MC? And so I used to work on weekends. My dad would drive me to gigs and I'll just stand up.

1 (13m 25s):
You knew right already in high school that you want it to be on Saturday night live and you went to college and you eventually, you dropped out while you're in college, you were doing standup. You were saying, I mean, D D where you, where you methodical and intentional about it. I mean, were you thinking to yourself, this is like, I need to do this to get better and better. Or did you just love doing it? Or was it both of those things

3 (13m 48s):
Better and better? I think was my first thing. Like I got to just get better enough. So if I kept having dreams of like Lorne Michaels calling me up, finding me in Albany, England, like Jimmy, Dana, Carvey, sick, we need you to come in. You know? And I go done. I can do, I can hear the church lady, you know, and whatever. And you know, you think that way you go, like why would no one would ever call someone to come in and replace the church lady or whatever Dana's bids, you know that he's doing already, but that in my head, I pictured him doing that and going, that's the way I'm going to get on Saturday night.

1 (14m 23s):
I mean, you, you, when you dropped out of college, you decided to move to Los Angeles. You were 21 and you were moving out there with the single pursuit of just honing your craft, trying to get better and better. You had a plan in mind.

3 (14m 38s):
I worked at this local newspaper in Troy, New York, outside of Albany called Metro land and the owner of Metro land. This guy, Peter England, who is moving to LA to become a music manager. So he was leaving Albany to go to where Hollywood is mean where the business was. So I, I was here. I was working, I was a secretary. So I would answer the phones and he was leaving. And I said, Hey, if you see anybody, here's my headshot. And my tape of my troll act that I was doing in college, my troll doll act. I go, if you see anybody and he goes, I'm not doing comedy, but okay, I'll take it with me. And he took it with him to LA and he worked at this company and there was this woman that worked there called her name was Randy Segal.

3 (15m 24s):
And she worked for a manager named Ray Rio at, at Brillstein gray. And that's a lot of names, but let me explain something. Bernie Brillstein and Brad gray were the biggest entertainment managers in the business. And anyone who knew anything about Sarat live at the time, a lot of cast members were on the roster of Brillstein gray. So I go, oh my gosh, if any connection to Brillstein gray. Yeah. That's my step in, this is getting closer and closer. Jimmy, this is something so Randy called me in Albany and said, Jimmy Fallon, this is Randy Siegel. And she goes, I think you have something. And I think you have to come out to LA immediately because it's a thing called pilot season.

3 (16m 7s):
And this, when people try out for shows and you could get a sitcom and blah, blah, blah. And she goes, yeah, I think you're a little green, but we can work on your act. And I think we should, we can get you onto something. I think you're a very castable and you're likable and funny. And I go, I don't really want to be on a sit-com though. I'd love to be on. I want to be on Sarat live. And she was like, okay. All right. Well, I mean, good. That's great. I mean, Hey, if you can do that, fantastic, but let's audition for other shows just so you can get used to this thing. We'll, we'll work on getting it, you know, Sarah live like, you know, that's a long shot. And so I go, all right, I'm just going to call my parents and say, Hey, I got this opportunity.

3 (16m 47s):
And I don't think it's going to come again. And I just, I borrowed all the money. I could borrow two, $3,000, maybe from my dad, my grandparents let me money. And I moved out to LA. I flew out on some airline that doesn't exist anymore, but they were like, just get out here. Now you could sleep on the couch and just go to auditions. And this is, this is the way you're going to do it. And I go, okay.

1 (17m 10s):
So, so when you got out there, when, when you got to to LA w what do you remember? What was it like? What, what did you do?

3 (17m 16s):
I lived on another one, the managers, couches. I slept on his couch in his living room for probably about a month and a half or two months until I could find a place of my own and see how I can afford it. Didn't have a car. Cause my dad was like, you can afford it and you can drive out and all this stuff. And that was a really big mistake because in LA you need a car to go anywhere. You can't go across the street without driving. You go wait. I can see, I know I could see it, but you can't get there. I mean, in LA, they, I know the best place to go for a walk. You, where are they take the 4 0 5 to the 1 0 1, you go, oh, no, I have to drive to get to the place to go walk.

3 (17m 57s):
So I'm like, everything's driving. So I'm like, that was a mistake. But I used to get rides and then go to the club early and just wait and stay there until it's my time to go onstage. You know,

1 (18m 8s):
We would just do, you would just do any standup gig you could get.

3 (18m 12s):
And anything I did any gig I can get the improv was my home club. I auditioned for them. And they said, yes. So you'll get like a, a Thursday night spot or something like that. And I go, okay, so Thursday night they put you up 10 45 or 11 o'clock at night and you get paid $7 and 13 cents or something weird and technical like that. I still have one of the check stubs and you just work in your act and he keeps showing up. And if you do well, they invite you back and do next Thursday next Thursday. And it becomes a steady gig and you do Wednesday and Thursday, and then you get invited to do a weekend game, Saturday gig. And that one, you get paid like $8, big step up.

1 (18m 52s):
Did you spend a lot of time at night writing, writing down material? I mean, w where you were, cause basically you you're going to get better and better and better. And sometimes you're going to really suck right on stage. But over time, you're getting more confident.

3 (19m 6s):
That's, what's all about just honing the act and tinkering and changing one little bit. And one thing or one, if something gets a laugh, you know, I remember I videotaped my, my act, you know, and sometimes I even just carry the video camera in my guitar case and record the audio of my act. And I would listen to my act all day long, the next day, and analyze it as a comedian, you have nothing really to do during the day. So during the day I just watched, you know, general hospital or crisis, right. And then I just work on bits and work in impressions and work on what lines I thought would be, oh, that's sticking out of my head or that's a good bit, I guess, which is kind of what I was doing. You know, when I was a kid, you know, my bedroom.

3 (19m 47s):
Yeah,

1 (19m 48s):
You would. I mean, you would record yourself, watch it or listen to it, which is really hard. I mean, that can be really painful, especially when you, you think you didn't perform, like I, even 25 years of doing this, it's hard for me to, to listen to myself. I do listen to the show and I critique myself. It's hard because I kicked myself. But like you read about athletes who sit in the, in the screening room and just watch, watch a game where they just sucked. And it's really hard. Did, did you, how did you do that? How'd you get through listening to your, your performances,

3 (20m 18s):
You live and learn, you know, you do things that are hacky and you go like, Ugh, I know that gets a laugh, but I can't leave it in my act because it's too corny and trying something that you think is going to be so funny and have it tank. And you're like, all right. I hope they invite me back because that one was rough. I remember once guy, I thought it would be. So I think it was a show. A showcase was a big deal. Like if HBO came to the improv and they're going to watch new comedians, they would showcase like five comedians. And out of those five, hopefully one person would get on HBO or something. And I, I remember not getting on those showcases, but if I was the first comedian on, after that showcase, they're still in the room. So I could, if I scored, then it's almost like being on the showcase, you know?

3 (21m 2s):
And I remember trying to grow my goatee as long as I could, or a beard or mustache. And it's very wispy and embarrassing, but I did. And I went and I shaved onstage. It had nothing to do with my act, but in my brain, I go, this is Andy Kaufman. This is so avant-garde. Everyone is going to talk about who is the guy that shaved on stage. That was genius that bit. I didn't know. I, it was so over-thought and then I had to bring a bowl with like kind of water in it so I can get the shaving cream out of the raiser. It was a disaster, it was on my face. And it was kind of burning after a while.

3 (21m 42s):
And I didn't know if I was bleeding. It was so stupid. And I remember it was like the longest 10 minutes and it just tanked. And I, that was just one of the hundreds of hundreds of times I've tanked in front of an audience,

1 (21m 57s):
But you have to go through that.

3 (21m 58s):
You actually have to go through it. And yeah. And what happens eventually is years later, you miss those days and you kind of laugh about those days. And I go, now I can talk to you about those days at the time, I couldn't even walk back into the improv. I was so embarrassed. It was just the worst, but you, you, you have to do it. I mean, you have to, it just builds your, your skill level. You're just like, I, if I can, if I can do this, when the jokes aren't working, I can definitely do it. When the jokes are working

1 (22m 31s):
You within two years, you got audition for SNL in 97. Yeah. Finally, you get your dream opportunity to audition.

3 (22m 39s):
Yeah. I, it was every step of the way I remember it. I enjoyed every step cause I go, Jimmy, this is, this is it. You might not make it past this. So just enjoy this because this is the story. But I remember going up and I think I have five minutes or seven minutes. And I knew from the first 30 seconds that it wasn't going to be, it wasn't going to work. I couldn't latch onto the audience. They didn't, I couldn't catch the

1 (23m 7s):
Way connect to them.

3 (23m 8s):
I couldn't get the wave. I was like, I knew it. I was like, you know, I'm doing this troll doll thing. And Lauren was there. I saw him walk in and he had a baseball hat on and you know, really pulled down and he kind of sat in the darkness. And I think, you know, I just remember it did not go well. And I remember leaving and there was a diner next door. And I just went to the diner next door and had coffee with my manager and, you know, and it was sad and it was like a depressing diner night. And so I just had to kind of get over it. And you know, I've probably cried. Don't know. I mean, this is a dream guy. This is all I ever wanted.

3 (23m 49s):
I mean, this is every time I cut into a birthday cake, I would wish for Sarah alive, every time I throw a coin in a fountain, it was obsessive. And so it was crushing. And then I kind of, I think I blocked it out and then just kind of went back to work and then go, okay, I got to improve this troll doll act.

1 (24m 12s):
You, I mean, you go back and it's discouraging, but you in your mind know that you've got to go for this again. Like there's going to be, I mean, did you, did you know, there was going to be another chance

3 (24m 24s):
I didn't, but in my head I just kind of willed that I can't, that they're almost like they're making a mistake. They have to, they have to have me, like they have to realize I will pay them to be on site live, you know, at the time. But that would mean something they have to realize. I will do it for free.

1 (24m 43s):
When we come back in just a moment. Jimmy's remarkable run on Saturday night. Live is not so remarkable film career. And the phone call that made him a star of late night TV, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this.

NetSuite (25m 10s):
The CFO's that get it, get it. The CFOs that don't, don't, let's talk about the CFO, the chief financial officer today's CFO is critical to the strategy and success of the business. And in growing companies, there are two kinds of CFOs. One who's struggling to keep up spreadsheets, everywhere, manual processes, errors, and lack of visibility into the numbers. It takes weeks to close the books. The other kind is on top of their game. Automated reports, inventory e-commerce and HR flow into the financial model, seamlessly insights coming with the click of a button with visibility and control of your financials. Inventory, HR planning, and budgeting. NetSuite is everything you need to grow all in one place. That's why NetSuite is the number one cloud financial system. Over 29,000 businesses already use Netsweet head to netsuite.com/built for a special one of a kind financing offer that's netsuite.com/built netsuite.com/built.

1 (26m 16s):
What do popped water Lily seeds, drone training and comfortable socks have in common. All three businesses received investment offers on the ABC reality show shark tank, and all three businesses were founded by graduate students from FW Olin graduate school of business at Babson college. Babson is fueling tomorrows entrepreneurial leaders, including founders of Bo Hannah, dark drones and Bombus. And these are just three of nearly a dozen from Babson alumni to end up on shark tank, but you don't have to go all the way to shark tank to land a significant investment for your business. As the worldwide leader in entrepreneurship education, Babson hosts, numerous pitch competitions each year, including the annual III pitch competition with a grand prize of a hundred thousand dollars.

1 (27m 4s):
Get the tools and mindset you need to successfully jumpstart your dreams from the school ranked. Number one for entrepreneurship for 29 years by us news and world report learn more about graduate level programs at babson.edu/grad. Now, Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 1997 and Jimmy has just blown his audition for SNL in front of the show's creator, Lorne Michaels. And it seems like his dream job may never happen, but he does finally land the gig. It's a pilot for a TV show on the WB network.

3 (27m 47s):
The show is about a catering business and I was a, I was like the delivery boy or something, and it was great experience. I loved it. It was called tasty sensations. And I just remember when I was doing my contract for that. And it was like, this is a big deal to get a pilot though, show those about to air. And it was a big producer involved. And I remember signing the contract and I said, can I just ask one thing if I get Sarat live, can I get out of this show? I remember them going, this is ridiculous. We're not going to put this in the contract, but you know, no one's ever we've never. No.

3 (28m 27s):
And then I think someone said to someone let's just sign the contract. This guy's not going to get started alive. So they put an extra page in the contract, never been done before. Never been done since I don't think but saying if I guess our live, I get out of the show out of my contract, it's all said and done.

1 (28m 46s):
And it's incredible that the, you got that clause into your contract because in 1998, a year after your first audition, you got another audition for SNL and anybody listening should just Google Jimmy Fallon Serna live audition. It's so amazing to watch because you're so young and, and so might be embarrassing for you to watch her. I don't know, maybe you cringe, but it's, it's really lovely. And it's a really great impressions that you do on state, Jerry Seinfeld and Chris rock and U2. And how long did it take for you to, to find out whether you were in, whether you even made it or not?

3 (29m 26s):
So yeah, when they make you wait, you know, like two, three weeks. So I think I was in LA, went back out to LA and they said, they're thinking about it. And then they called my manager and said, Lauren's in LA next week. And so he wants to meet with Jimmy and his office at paramount studios. And you know, I, at that time I had a car and I drove onto the lot and paramount studios and it's a beautiful, it's like the godfather, you know, that's where they, you know, they shot the govern. You see that paramount, it's an old school Hollywood studio. It makes you feel like you're in the business. It's so cool to go into that lot. And I remember walking into Lauren's office and everything was white. It was very kind of perfect.

3 (30m 8s):
And I walked in and I sat across the desk from him and he was like, Jimmy, do you wear wigs? And I was like, and I misunderstood. I thought he meant like, cause I was spiking my hair up at the time. So you're like, oh no, I do this to my hair. And I, you know, I can do it anyway. Again, part of the SA you know what? I was so nervous and he goes, no, no, what I'm saying is I, if you don't, you do characters because you know what I'm saying is we, we want you for the show. And it was just so silent after that and slow motion and so emotional. I don't really remember the rest of the interview with him, but I remember leaving and going. I hope I make you proud and leaving.

3 (30m 50s):
And then I went to the first payphone I could find and call my mom and I just lost it. I was like, just, wow. I was like, dude, I got it. And we were both crying and it was great.

1 (31m 2s):
She must have been so proud.

3 (31m 4s):
It was great. She was so proud. My dad, every, my sister, it's the American dream. You don't even believe that this could happen from a small town. I had no connections. My family was not in the business. No one I knew was in the business. You know, it was, it really went down and it was just like, all right, so now I'm coming back home to New York triumphant, you know? And I'm so happy.

1 (31m 27s):
You, you were like a student of the show, a super fan. You'd seen practically every episode, you've done impressions of almost every character had been on it. Like all of a sudden you are now in a show with your heroes. People you've been watching the season before and studying. I mean, I can't imagine the pressure that, you know, I once saw like an interview that bill Hader did talking about how nervous he would get before Santa live. Just so nervous. You know? Cause I guess over the loudspeaker, they'd say, you know, 10 minutes til we're live on national television, five minutes, we're alive on national television.

3 (32m 0s):
It is a live television show. Yeah. Broadcast that to millions of people, which is rare. They don't do that anymore.

1 (32m 9s):
No,

3 (32m 10s):
But just hearing Don Pardo say your name gave me goosebumps. You only pictured my brain, but for him to say like you Julie fella, you know, or to watch him do it, you know, even if I wasn't in the show, I was just so still so happy. Sometimes they would actually cut your picture and name out of the opening credits if you weren't in the show. I mean, how cruel is that,

1 (32m 40s):
But where do you, when you had to go on stage for the debut in 1998, I mean, were you okay with that? Or were you scared? Were you, I mean,

3 (32m 49s):
Garrett. Yeah, butterflies. It was my first ever gig was I played Gilbert Gottfried. I did an impression of Gilbert Gottfried. It was a great premise. It was the Hollywood squares, except there was an earthquake in Hollywood and the, it all crumbled, the squares, all, it was a disaster But they kept playing the game. So it was all crumbled and there was blood everywhere, but they were like, I want to take Fran Drescher to block, you know? And so I was Gilbert Godfrey and I was covered in blood and I holding my intestines or something, you know, and I go, my line was,

10 (33m 32s):
I am holding my entire intestinal tract and my own hands. That's not.

3 (33m 39s):
And that was my first line ever said on sorry, live. And it got a big laugh and I go, oh my gosh. And I was it. And no, it was like cloud nine, the best thing, best night of my life after party, my manager there, my parents were there. My sister was there. Every comedian, you know, from everyone was there. They said, oh, you're the kid that take over Godfrey. That was good. And you know, the internet was starting at the time. Yeah. And so there was like an SNL sites that they would review the show and be really, you know, hard on the show. And they said this new kid, Jimmy Fallon did a great Gilbert Gottfried. He's got a promise. And you know, I printed those things out and clip them out and kept them.

1 (34m 23s):
One of the things that I guess sort of happened to you was that you, you really, I don't know if you sought him out or it just happened that, that Lauren Michaels kind of became a really important mentor. I mean, you were all of a sudden, you're in New York and you're starting to get recognized and you know, eventually you get very famous and he, I guess you really kind of sought out his advice and mentorship.

3 (34m 46s):
Yeah. You know, when you first are on the show, you just, you're very kind of intimidated and scared to talk to Lauren. I just didn't want to be fired. Really. I just wanted it. That was my thing. I'm like just took it, fired me and just stay on for two seasons. And that's great, you know? And so, but at the after parties, Marci Klein, I give her credit for this. She was like, will you go over and say, thank you to Lauren. I go, I just don't want to bother. She goes, Jimmy, go over right now. And thank him. I go, okay. And I'd go up to Lauren at his table and he'd be there with, you know, you name it. I mean, Paul Simon, you know, whoever someone's sitting there and you go and I go, thank you.

3 (35m 29s):
And he'd go, okay, well you did a good job or something like that. And they go, okay. And then through the years, thank you. Became like Lauren cred show, you know, I'm sorry I messed that. But this could have been better. That was there. And he's like, no, that was good. And did that. And then it got to a Lauren, hi, thank you. And he's like, come sit down. And then you're sitting at the table. And then now, then by the end of it, it's like every party I'm sitting at the table. So it's Lauren and I talking about the show and you know, and then your friends and you go like, oh my gosh, I can't believe what happened in three years compared to how nervous I was. But I, I think, you know, no, one's that intimidating, you know, it really, everyone wants to in this visit, I think, you know, they want to see it work.

3 (36m 12s):
They want, they're nice and so smart. And they just want to be around fun and funny people. So we really hit it off, you know, and we became really, really, really good friends. And he's like one of my best friends right now.

1 (36m 24s):
All right. So, so by 2000 or the early two thousands, you're you become like a staple on, on SNL, your turn, like a bunch of different sketches and, and you're doing tons of impressions, but, but at some point, did it, did it just become a job or were you still like, you know, this is amazing. I can't believe I'm here.

3 (36m 45s):
Yeah. I mean, I, you know, you reach a certain part where again, you start peaking and you become a favorite of the show and then you start in my, my head, I started getting into too many sketches, you know, they were just throwing me in sketches just because, you know, people would want to see me. They weren't necessarily,

1 (37m 3s):
Oftentimes people want to see laugh.

3 (37m 6s):
That became a thing at one point. Yeah. I mean, I, I'm an easy Laffer and so I would break a lot, but not on purpose. And it's, it started with cow bell, you know, because I was out of my league. I was out of my league in that sketch.

1 (37m 23s):
I just can't even hear that word, those words in that library. So funny.

3 (37m 27s):
Well, here's my thinking and I was in a sketch and it was one of the funniest things, you know, but to be honest, it wasn't that funny when we did it at dress rehearsal and it was in the, it was in the Wayne's world section of eight H on the stage, which is it's famous for Wayne's world now. But at the, at the time it was also famous for where sketches go to die. So if you do have a sketch in that section of the stage, it's usually means you're going to get cut. And so I think they just thought it was funny that there was cowbell and don't fear the Reaper. You know, if you look at the liner notes and I was the drummer don't

11 (38m 1s):
Fear, the Reaper,

3 (38m 2s):
You know, Christopher Walken was the producer and you had to keep coming out and go like, guys, let that take was okay, but

11 (38m 9s):
I could have used a little more cow bell. Cool. Let's take it again. And Jean, yeah, really explore the studio.

3 (38m 20s):
I was like, okay, I'm going to just tell me that. No one's cause it were lip-syncing the song, you know, I was like, I'm going to do something that no one's done. I like

11 (38m 26s):
What I'm hearing.

3 (38m 26s):
And I remember I had drumsticks and I was like, I go, I'm going to count off with my sticks. Like, I'll go, oh, here we go. And then lip-sync and I go, that is, that is, people are going to say, Jimmy, that saved the sketch. It was so real that you did that drumstick stupid thing that I thought was so funny. And then what happened was of course the unplanned, which is we made it to air and everyone was the funniest version of themselves. They could've ever been ever. Chris Cornell, Chris Catan, her ratio, Christopher Walken wasn't even sounded like he was speaking English. He was doing such an impression of Christopher Walken

11 (39m 7s):
Fever. And he only prescription is more cowbell,

3 (39m 13s):
Will Ferrell. We're a smaller shirt on air. So when he lifted up his hands to hit the cowbell, his gut like fell out of the bottom of his under this thing. And it was so funny that it was like hot, almost like I remember the temperature being hot in the room. And I remember I had one line like

11 (39m 35s):
Convince herself as Jean

3 (39m 37s):
And will looks at me and he's sweating. And I saw the eyes of a crazy man and I just started laughing. I just thought this is the funniest thing ever saw. And then I remember, I think after party, you know, everyone's like cowbell was funny. That was good. And then they go, yeah, I don't, you know, Jimmy don't do that. You know, we don't do that here. You know, I don't like people breaking, like yeah. And I go, I I'm sorry, I didn't do it on purpose. I, you know, I just thought it was funny and they go, right. But you're in the sketch. You're not watching the sketch. We don't need you to laugh.

1 (40m 13s):
It's I mean, it's amazing that, that the cowbell more cowbell sketch became one of the historic sketches. I mean, it's one of the 10 best known sketches in cinema life history, I guess you started, I mean, you know, once you started to really become like a fan favorite on the show, you started getting a lot of pitches to be in, to do films and other projects. And I guess it got to a point where it just wasn't sustainable. You could not do setting out live and films. And so, so you, so you left two, 2004. You leave the dream job after six years to pursue this film career. I wanna, I want to ask you about your acting career because

3 (40m 57s):
We'll be sure to hear the music on this part, cut the sad music playing behind me. Now

1 (41m 4s):
Make note that bring the sad music. God.

3 (41m 7s):
Oh my mute, my movie crew.

1 (41m 10s):
It didn't last long, but it was, I mean, you know, part of it, it seems to me that you, you kind of decided that you, you didn't really want to pursue it because you, it wasn't that long. Right? I mean, it, it, it can take some time before you make a film that

3 (41m 26s):
Thank you guy. Yeah. It was not that long. I left Sarah live going again. I want to be Eddie, Eddie Murphy. I want to be Belushi. I want to be bill Murray. That's what you learned from Sarah law. That's what they do. Yeah. You do that. And then you do movies. And so I was just really picky about my roles and what I was going to do. And then I remember somebody said, dude, you got to do something or else you're going to miss the boat. And I, I chose taxi because queen Latifa just had a hit with Steve Martin. And it was the most successful film of all time in France taxi. Wow. I think they made like four of them.

3 (42m 8s):
So I was like, okay, if this hits big, I'll do four of these. This is a franchise. It's not even like this Jurassic park of comedy. It's like, this is like, wow, this doesn't happen. So I did it and we had so much fun doing it. I just put all my, my eggs in that basket. I didn't, I should have done three movies and just hope that one hit, you know, instead I put everything in a taxi and when it came out, it just tanked. And I was starting to film my second and final movie fever pitch. And you know, once taxi didn't work ever kind of got cold feet and it was like, Ooh.

3 (42m 52s):
And you kind of get like a, like a stink around you in Hollywood. Like, whoa, he's not the guy we thought he was going to be. He's not, not Eddie Murphy. And so when the theater pitch came out and that didn't open, I was like, Ooh, where, what am I going to do? I have no, I had no plan.

1 (43m 12s):
Yeah. You know, it's interesting because every failure is, it is it's, it's hard, especially while you're experiencing it, but oh yeah. In every case, in every interview I've done on the show, every failure has been like a gift or a blessing

3 (43m 25s):
Thought you were going to say. Yeah, because it's tough. And it's like, it's an ego check. It's a really, yeah. It's a confidence zapper. I mean, Ooh.

1 (43m 34s):
But you had to, you specifically had to do that. I mean, you met your wife on a set of fever pitch, like the person that you would spend the rest of your life with and that you create a family with, like that would not have happened if you didn't experience that those three years of, of failure.

3 (43m 48s):
Correct. I mean, I've made so many great friends from that, but, and, and memories from that and, you know, and drew Barrymore, but the biggest thing. Yeah. My wife, Nancy <inaudible> was the producer of that film withdrew. And that's where we got the spark and we just loved him. We used to hang out almost every night for months, just, you know, not dating or doing anything, just hanging out. She was so interesting and beautiful and different and smart. And I go, I've never met anyone like this ever. And then I was, again, I didn't want to get fired. I didn't want to do any, so I didn't do anything while we were filming, but then we're selling the movie and promoting it.

3 (44m 30s):
And I said, man, I guy, I miss you. You know, I haven't, I missed hanging out. She goes, I miss you too. And I go, well, let's hang out. And she was like, okay. And then we just started just dating then, you know? And I was, and then, yeah, she stuck with me through the, the, the dark periods and, you know, still motivates me and to do whatever I do and, and, and get me to keep going and keep moving forward and trying stuff, you know? And you need that.

1 (45m 2s):
When you, when, when Lauren Michaels sort of approached you to think about maybe doing late night when Brian was going to be, be moved to the, the earlier hour, did you think that, I mean, cause I would have thought, oh, this is awesome. This is, this is amazing. An amazing opportunity. I mean, it's the late shows on it, like 1230. But did you think it was sort of a step backwards or did you think that it was a huge opportunity? Or how did you what'd you think about it initially

3 (45m 31s):
At the time I didn't want to do it. I was leaving the show. I was going to do movies and that was my goal. I didn't want to do a sitcom. I just didn't, I didn't want to do television. I was like, I'm a movie guy. And so I remember leaving and Conan O'Brien was promised to take over the tonight show from Jay Leno in six years' time or something. And so I was leaving and Lauren goes, would you ever want to host a late night? You know? Cause you could take over Conan and in six years, if it doesn't have to go and we were kind of laughing, like, I don't know if he was joking or serious. And Tina Fey was in the office. She goes, you'd actually be good at that.

3 (46m 11s):
She goes, cause you talked to all these people, you go to bars and you just talk to him. I was like, I mean, you love talking to people. I think you'd be great at it. And I go, yeah, I am. Well, I don't know. I mean my movie career weights, you know, and it just didn't work out. And then, you know, I had a couple years where you just go, like, I dunno what to do. And then I got a call from Lauren and he goes, do you remember when I asked you if you want to take over for Conan O'Brien and I go, yeah, he goes, do you want to do that? And I was like, well let me, yeah. I mean, well let me think about this. Let me, I want to, I have to ask my wife because I'm married now. So I asked Nancy I'm in LA and she goes, are you kidding?

3 (46m 53s):
Yes, you have to do this. We're told that you have to do this Jimmy you're on the list. There's David Letterman, Conan O'Brien and you that's it there's only three people. That's an amazing list to be on. You have to. And so I said, I called Lauren and go, yes, I want to do this. And he's like, okay, great. Now I just gotta convince NBC. And you know, so NBC didn't want me for late night because the movies didn't work and I wasn't hot, you know? And so they wanted other people and they were going to give it to someone else. And then I remember just stepping in kind of and saying, look, I know Jesus, I know Jimmy, I know his work ethic.

3 (47m 35s):
And if it's not Jimmy, then you don't have me as a producer. I'm not going to produce a

1 (47m 41s):
Wow.

3 (47m 41s):
He really stepped it up. And I remember him doing that and then they got serious. And so Jeff Zucker at the time was running the network and I had to have meetings with Jeff. And then he was like, you know that this is a lot of work. Right. I go, yeah. Yeah. He kept asking me that like, do you know it's a ton of work? I go, yeah. I knew Jeff. I mean, I mean, at this time, I didn't want to say it, but again now I'm kind of, I'm desperate, man. I don't know what I'm going to do. I mean, this is again opportunities unbelievable. And the takeover for Conan O'Brien is fantastic. Biggest Conan O'Brien fan. He was my first late night talk show, you know? And so I'm going to do whatever I think I have to do to make this show a hit.

1 (48m 25s):
When we come back in just a moment, Jimmy talks about how he comes up with new ideas, whether he's working on a bit of book, a new show or a new product that you never knew, you needed stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this, This episode of how I built this is brought to you in part by Wix, our friends over at Wix. Yes, the website and business building platform know a thing or two about turning a scrappy startup team into a global organization, serving millions of people. And they want to share what they've learned with you in a new micro podcast series called ready for takeoff by Wix, where the company's founders and leaders share super short lessons designed to help you build better products and teams faster, subscribe and follow ready for takeoff buy Wix right now on apple podcasts, Spotify, or wherever you listen to this show.

Whoop (49m 29s):
This podcast is brought to you by whoop a wearable health and fitness coach. Whoop isn't just another fitness tracker. It measures your heart rate, variability, resting, heart rate, and a fully phased breakdown of your sleep. Whoops algorithms, then process all of that data to provide you with a daily personalized recovery score that can help, you know, how you should approach your day will really change how I think about sleep and recovery. I've always known how important those two are, but the data takes it to another level. If I wake up fully recovered, I know I can go out and push myself, whether it's an, a workout or a full day of interviews. And when I'm feeling a bit low, whoop can tell and provides me with coaching feedback to help get me back on track. I wore their all new four dot oh, it's designed with new biometric tracking, including skin temperature, blood oxygen, and a lot more sleep, better, recover faster and workout smarter with whoop. The all new device is free. When sign up for a membership, go to woop.com w H O O p.com and enter built at checkout to save 15% off today.

3 (50m 43s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2009 and Jimmy has just become the host of late night on NBC.

1 (50m 53s):
A few years later, he'll graduate to one of the most coveted jobs in television host of the tonight show. But late night is where he really begins to build a personal brand. When you started hosting that show, one of the things that you really did and, and became kind of a signature of what you do is just singing with famous people and getting them to do things that are just unbelievable, like getting Paul McCartney onto the show to sing yesterday, but to sing about scrambled eggs. And how did you, how did you do that? How did you convince people to, to do those things?

3 (51m 33s):
I don't know. I just think at the time in my brain, that's just made sense. Like that's something they should do and you know, and you go, like, I have an idea of, you know, Paul McCartney is like, this would be funny. What if he went back to his original recording of yesterday with his words that he wrote down the scrambled eggs and we just finished the song and it's a whole songs about food and you know, and so I kind of pitch it to him. He was on Saturday night live and I went into his dressing room and he's so nice, you know? And I go, I probably go, hello, Jim, you know? And so I go, well, I had this idea and he goes, okay. He goes, well, can you sing it for me? And I go, oh my gosh, you know, I didn't plan it.

3 (52m 13s):
So I go, oh, okay. So I had the, the script. So I'm like scrambled eggs. Oh my darling, how I love your legs, but not as much, you know, whatever. And all of a sudden he's playing his guitar. The one that he played yesterday on him and singing with his head right next to me, looking at the lyrics and I'm freaking out and I could tell he's he's into it. He's laughing. And I go, oh my gosh, this is going to be fun.

13 (52m 44s):
Oh my baby, love your legs. Not as much as I love <inaudible> waffle fry <inaudible>.

3 (53m 11s):
And so then that moment just kind of happened, you know, and I'm a fan of a giant fan of Palm Carney. So he knew that it was coming from I'm a fan, you know, I'm not just looking for a hit and just a gotcha moment. Come out, we'll do scrambled eggs. Then you split and I don't ever see it again. I'm like, I love you. So I, as a fan of Paul McCartney, I would like to see this. So I think I sometimes come across from that angle as well. Like they could tell it was coming from a place of joy and, and fandom. And I, I wouldn't make you look bad.

1 (53m 43s):
You know, one of the things that I have to assume happened in 2009, when you took over late-night and then, you know, eventually the tonight show is all of a sudden you went from being Jimmy Fallon. You've got your agent, you know, maybe one or two people who you kind of work with, to, to overseeing kind of overseeing a really large staff. I mean, there's a show runner, but I mean, all of those people, all of those, every single person in that chain is working really hard, but it's up to you to execute. And you're kind of the leader of a really big team of people. And that's a different experience. That's a totally different experience

3 (54m 21s):
Completely. And it's not my wheelhouse at all, and it's not even, you know, it's not even why I got hired because, you know,

1 (54m 28s):
See yourself as a leader. You don't have those two natural tendency.

3 (54m 31s):
No, I mean, I, I definitely do, but you know, I just know that that's not what got me the job, what got me, the job was my work ethic. And I think my, the thirst for entertaining, you know, and trying to make a great party. And then as like you said, as it grows, you have to start making business decisions and being the manager and running an office. And it's a tricky thing that I'm still learning, but it's curve balls being thrown every day. And there's a lot of problem solving and you wish you read more Dale Carnegie, you know, then, then listening to Rodney Dangerfield albums, because I probably could have learned some more,

1 (55m 14s):
It's still a really useful book, how to win friends and philosophy. It's an amazingly useful book. I mean, it's so basic, but it's like an, it seems obvious, but it's so right on.

3 (55m 22s):
It is right. And that's I, but I never went to business school or studied management or any of that stuff. And it's just almost like life lessons and kind of apologizing before you even do anything. You're like, guys, I don't know how to do this, but let's just see if we can get this off the ground. You know, and I have a lot of support and a lot of help obviously, but it is definitely you're involved. I mean, it's a full on immersion. I mean, it's, it's my life.

1 (55m 52s):
I mean, I, I read somewhere that in your, I think in your first year, on late night, you brought in like almost $200 million in revenue for NBC. So I mean, that's a massive, massive business. I mean, that's a huge success, right? You are the host of the show. It's a really successful business. There are lots of people involved. How do you do so much? I mean, on any given day, you can see an amazing, highly produced video just for social media, that, that you've made, that your team has made that you're in. And you can imagine how long it took to do that. There's so much work that happens around that actual, beyond the live recordings of the show.

1 (56m 35s):
There's so much that you're doing is your time just beyond your control. Are there, is there, is there other people or, or somebody who essentially tells you where you need to be at all times?

3 (56m 47s):
You know, I mean, I have a very great assistant that Kelly Powers, who's honestly, she's the secret sauce, but always keeps me on time and let you know, tells me where I'm supposed to be and all that stuff. But we have tons of producers that are on point and they know how to plan ahead. And it's all planned. I mean, right now, you know, we have sketches and stuff that we're starting to film that will air two months from now. Just because, I mean, I'm already thinking about next year, I'm thinking about, you know, what can we do for holidays? You know, whatever bits you can think of the sooner you can think about it, do it now and get it rolling so that you can go like, is this a possibility, Hey, this is a silly idea of what, you know, how can we get, you know, Elizabeth Olson to do one division without wardrobe or anything and on the zoom camera, but still make it with art production and what we can do on our end.

3 (57m 40s):
And I have a great team and great set designers and costume and wardrobe. And man, did I miss them? You know, when the pandemic, Wendy did those at home shows you just miss all of that and you go, oh my gosh, boy, did we take that for granted? You know,

1 (57m 56s):
But those shows were really special. They were really

3 (57m 59s):
Right. I haven't gone back and watched him, you know, but I should, or because a lot of people come up to me and they go that I love the at home things. And I go, yeah, I kind of remember just thinking, I don't know how I'm doing all this. It was just me and my wife and me and Nancy. And when that all happened, I went home and my wife was like, what's the plan. I go, I don't know. No one knows. We're just, I don't know. I think we're just off until they tell us to come back. She just goes, she goes, oh no, no, no, you can't. This is when people need you. This is exactly the time when you do not take off. No, no, no. Get your phone, get a tripod and do this.

3 (58m 40s):
And this is at the time I couldn't even, it was like kind of almost illegal to drive to a store was to get essential, you know? And so in my head and essential was a tripod. So I went to like a best buy, got a tripod that held iPhones and then just started doing stuff and putting, I asked, see if I could put things on YouTube with like a website of a charity. And I just filmed more and more like hours of stuff and just send it off to our editor, Justin, who would edit from his apartment in Brooklyn to try to get on the air on NBC. And it was like just, it was bizarre. It was a real trippy time. And I was trying to think and solve everyone, you know, whatever I could do to help whatever I could do to get people to think of anything else, but this awful pandemic, that was my gig there.

3 (59m 33s):
And I just tried to make it work.

1 (59m 36s):
You know, we could spend the entire episode talking about like your entrepreneurial ideas, some of which have happened like pacifiers with dolls attached or, you know, ideas like magnetized tennis balls or cranberry slices that you put on a Turkey sandwich. You've lots of ideas, some of what you've actually got glasses that you can twirl and, and we, and then you, you know, you have an entire business, that's a production company with, with shows that you've already released that have been some have been really successful shows that you're not in like the kids' tonight show and, and a new show called password. I've been all these things that you are part of. And I wonder, do you, you know, cause from the outside it can seem overwhelming. Like, and I'm sure people ask you this all the time.

1 (1h 0m 17s):
They'll say, how do you do it? Because it's a part of you, do you need to constantly create stuff to just keep yourself stimulated? Is there some part of you that just has to do that?

3 (1h 0m 27s):
I think so. I think there might be, you know, I, my wife will say it too. Like, you know, thank God for the show because I have so many ideas and I dunno what I would do with them. You know, like last night I just wake up in the middle of the night and I have an idea for, for when the holidays come around, like what, instead of elf on the shelf would have its Elvis on the shelves. And so, but he's cool. He doesn't rat on you, you know, like these are ideas. I don't know if they are anything that's funny, but I could see, you know, Elvis, Presley's going like, Hey man, on your show, you're doing there's something to that. And so I love, you know, when I would ever see you and I would just tell you dumb ideas I have. Cause I have just lists, you know, today I thought of someone should so much create a balloon.

3 (1h 1m 10s):
That's good for the environment.

1 (1h 1m 12s):
Yeah. Like made out of cornstarch or something. Yeah.

3 (1h 1m 14s):
Does it exist? Maybe it might. I was thinking about, I'm celebrating my, you know, my wife's birthday and I'm like, I can't get balloons because you know, they're just terrible. I mean like, and they go, who was not solved the balloon thing. I go someone must've, I mean maybe on shark tank or something, but we can have kids, parties and balloons are cool and actually put them up in the air who cares? Let them fly into the ocean. They're good for the ocean, their fish food.

1 (1h 1m 38s):
I mean, you, you were an actor. I mean, you were a comedian and an actor and, and then a talk show host. And today you're oldest things, but you, you, I mean, you created businesses, production companies, books, television shows that employ lots of people. I mean, you are an entrepreneur. I mean it's, and it's a sound weird to tier two here. You described that way.

3 (1h 2m 2s):
Yeah. Because you know, I I'm, I'm just, I don't, I don't, I it's just kind of me. I don't have a real, but I guess he do have so slowly forming a team or sup, but it's just,

1 (1h 2m 13s):
I mean, there's, there's, there's probably, I mean, how big is the staff? The tonight show for

3 (1h 2m 18s):
400 people.

1 (1h 2m 20s):
I mean, there's probably a thousand people who are employed in some capacity because of your work.

3 (1h 2m 26s):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. You're right. It's such an honor. I'm so lucky to get to do this, but it's like, what's great about where we film and you've been on the show, you've seen it. It's kind of an intimate show. It doesn't feel like you're, you're, you're not at O two arena. You know, it feels small ish, you know, but still show business. I mean, you're coming through the curtain is 200 people, but you don't think you're talking to millions. So to me it kind of feels like home. Like, you know, I remember when I was on Sarah live, I, I wanted to sleep on the stage one night, just get it like a blanket and sleep. Eventually someone talked me out of it, but I was going to sneak down and do it just because I wanted it to feel like home.

3 (1h 3m 13s):
Like that's my stage. Like anything, if you can do what you do in your house, in front of people, you know, be that comfortable. That would be the best. So I think it keeps growing and you know, I don't want to do the same thing. I always go like, what can I do? That's something else that I go like, ah, that could be just something fun to do again, not thinking about money or can it be a franchise? Can it be something, would this, does someone need this? Is this something that should exist? And I, you know, and that's kind of where I, I think of a lot of my best ideas come from.

1 (1h 3m 46s):
Can you like, I'm curious, can you give me an example

3 (1h 3m 49s):
Like that? I wrote a book called your baby's first word will be dad, dad, because I thought it was funny because I had my first baby and I was hoping that she would say dad at first, no one, we didn't have a competition. We didn't talk about it. Me and my wife, there was no competition, but there was one sided competition. I wanted the baby to say dad that. So I was like, whatever I could do to get this kid to say, dad, dad, I don't care. I was, I was giving like bottles of milk and going like, do you want dad, dad, do you want a dad? Like th thinking that you would confuse milk with data and want us, you know, ask for data. And so I made this book just where it's just, you know, animal sounds crack, you know? And then the, the adult duck is saying, just say, dad, that, you know, the baby, won't say quack.

3 (1h 4m 32s):
And the cows wants you to say data. And the calf says, mu you know, and no one says data and it took off and it was, became a giant thing. And then like started getting videos from people of, of their kids, them reading the book to their kids, but their kids reading it back to them. And they're saying like, Jimmy, you, you've kind of taught my kids how to read. I'm like, what the hell? That is not, I mean, that was never the plan at all. I've, I'm freaking out because this is a reward I did not see coming at all. And it's really rewarding. It's pretty cool to feel like a teacher,

1 (1h 5m 12s):
You know, one of the things that, that I'm curious about as, I mean, you're still, you've got, you know, 25, maybe 30 years of Denton. I mean, Johnny Carson did it for a long time. You can, you're not yet 50. You can do this for a long time, but you know, there's also a model which is like Merv Griffin. He started wheel of fortune and like he had this massive production company and he was major like major sort of Hollywood mogul. And there's, there's, there's that model too, which is, he was a talk show host. He had a show and people thought of him that way, but he had this giant, like BD a business behind him is any part of that appealing to you as, as, as kind of a model, because you can do that. I mean, in the sense, what you're doing now could be a version of that

3 (1h 5m 55s):
If it's fun. Yeah. I think, you know, there's certain things I can do that I don't do because I don't know. Do I want to have meetings every night? Do I want to have dinner with the, no, I don't feel like that. You know, I, I kind of liked doing my own thing and at this pace I can do my own thing, but still make the stuff I want to do in the same quality. You know, I think if you get too crazy and you, I start coming out with my own line of this and that I go, I don't know if I can control all that quality control and that's up to this point. I think I've done a pretty good job at whatever I've done. It's been a pretty decent quality. And you know, whether it's a Christmas song or if it's a, you know, silly in invention or something, or a TV show,

1 (1h 6m 39s):
How, how comfortable and you mentioned like kind of being a control freak, and maybe that's not the right term, I'm totally resonates, resonates with me because when you do something that you love and is meaningful and you feel like it's a high quality product, you, you really want to be involved with it, but you know, how do you, I mean your name and your brand, let's say, and brand is a weird word to use around a human, but it's a reality it's, it's attached to the things you do, whether it's your books or the tonight show, which is so high quality. And then all of these shows that you're part of, so clash of the cover bands, and that's my jam password. That's the kids tonight show you can't be involved.

1 (1h 7m 21s):
Like some of that requires just letting go, right. And letting other people kind of, you know, oversee that, that brand. How comfortable are you with that?

3 (1h 7m 30s):
Not very. And I think, you know, some of the things that I can see, I go, oh, if I did that, I would've done it differently. And I would have, you know, but you have to let people stretch to around you and grow and give people opportunities and stuff like that. And, but, you know, the key is surround yourself with good people, get me the best person. So we can get to this goal and have the hit, which is rare. It's so hard to have a hit show. That's my jam was so hard to do kind of it's a lot like how to create a stage and get a budget and book the show and get a good placement when the show comes out and, you know, are people going to watch?

3 (1h 8m 12s):
Cause it's up against football, which is the only thing people are watching. And it did well. It, because people could see that it came from a good place. I, the hope. And you know, when I think about that, when I have my guests on the show, I like a lot of stuff. And I feel like I don't want to come off as a, in genuine, you know, like, or like that. I like everything. You know, I don't like everything, but I mean, I have opinions on things, but I know how much work goes into this stuff. Yeah. And I go, like, I know no one wants to make a flop. And this was, you know, six months of your life making this TV show or movie or, you know, and sometimes people know when it's a flop, you know, they come on the show and they're like, yeah, Jimmy, this one is a rough one.

3 (1h 8m 53s):
And I go, okay, let's go. Let's go, man. It's part of the business. And I want to be here for the highs and I wanna be here for the lows. And I think even Miley Cyrus gave me some great advice on my show. She was like, it's all ebbs and flows, man.

1 (1h 9m 8s):
She's experienced that shirt for sure as have you.

3 (1h 9m 11s):
Yeah, exactly. So don't get too excited when it's going well and don't get too bummed out when it's not going.

1 (1h 9m 18s):
Which remarkable to me about your show is that it is really, even when you think a show, isn't good. It's still funny. There's still really great moments in music. The consistency, like the, the quality of the show is so high and you're doing that every single night. We on our team are trying to do that once a week. And I feel a lot of pressure, you know, I want our show to be worth someone's time. Cause I'm asking somebody to give me an hour and a half of their time to listen to the show and I don't want to waste their time. Exactly. And so how does that sort of feed into an informed the way you think about all the projects you do?

3 (1h 9m 52s):
I mean, you got to show up, you got to get in early and you got to leave late, you know, the best people do. And if you care, it shows and it just, it actually, it spreads around the office and it's like, you know, like when there's bad news about ratings or something, you know, I don't care about that stuff. I don't even care when we're winning, but it's like, you know, we had Daniel Craig on the show, we were talking about James Bond and he got cast as you know, James Bond. And he got slammed in the press, slammed. They like blonde bond. How can we have a blonde James Bond and blue? Who is this guy? And dude, they trashed him and his publicist or somebody said, don't read the internet, which is always hilarious to me, that means it's terrible.

3 (1h 10m 40s):
I mean, it's like, oh, everyone loves you too, but don't read the inner it's like, so of course the first thing he does, he reads the internet and he said it was so awful and so depressing. And he went to set and everyone had read the internet and everyone was just depressed around him. And he was like, I gotta buck up, man. I'm James Vaughan. I gotta be the leader here. And I got to tell everyone, like, I know you're all reading this stuff, but it's not true. We didn't even shoot a piece of film yet. We don't even know if I'm a bad James Bond. And once he came out of the water, paparazzi got shots of him coming out of the water, like James Bond. He was the number one thing. And everyone's like, he's going to be the best James Bond.

3 (1h 11m 21s):
But it's just interesting how that like energy flows. So I think you have to love it. And you have to know that, put your energy into quality and putting the love into it.

1 (1h 11m 34s):
But I wonder when you think about where you want to be in 10 or 15 years, I mean, do you think out that far ahead and think, you know, I think I want to maybe produce a bunch of shows and kind of be on the sidelines and maybe be in some of them. And I don't know, does that ever kind of cross your mind?

3 (1h 11m 52s):
I would be lying if I said I didn't think about it, but I, I don't, you know, I always come to the conclusion that I wouldn't be happy with that. I, I just think, I feel like I could do this for the rest of my life, as long as NBC and the audience would, will have me. I will. I think, why not? I think let's see how good, how good can it get? You know, how good can I get interviewing? I'm getting better every year I do this. And so I think I want to just keep going until the audience doesn't want it anymore. But I think, I think about the history. I think of Leno, I think of Johnny Carson and I think of Steve Allen and I go, I think they would want me to go further and I wish Johnny Carson could see how big the tonight show has gotten because you know, the Tomahawk was the biggest clip from the tonight show where the potato chip lady and that was no internet that existed just from word of mouth.

3 (1h 12m 54s):
I mean, and, and, and re hearing a clip. But I mean, like, imagine, I mean, it's global does people from around the world that come to the tonight show now it's like, I want to see how big I can make this. And I want to see how, how better can I get?

1 (1h 13m 10s):
I think I know a version of what this answer might be, but maybe I'm wrong. Cause you've, you've kind of hinted at it. But when you think about, you know, where you were and where you started and where you came from and where you are today, I mean, you are probably one of the, I think one of the easily, one of the 50, most famous people in the United States recognizable. I mean, when you just think about where you've come to, who you are, how much of that do you attribute to just the grind because you did work really hard and how much do you think it has to do with, with luck?

3 (1h 13m 43s):
There's a piece of luck without a doubt. But I think also this drive and, and you really have to practice and practice and practice because you never know when luck is going to come, you know, it, all of a sudden it happens and you go, well, that was my lucky day. You know, it's funny. I have a picture in my office hanging in it's it's two photos at one is Paul McCartney pointing out at this crowd. And the other picture is me in the crowd because I'm the one who pointing at and I'll never forget. This was September 19th. That was my birthday. And Paul McCartney was playing in Brooklyn at Barclays center. And that's where I was born in Brooklyn.

3 (1h 14m 25s):
So I went to the Paul McCartney show and in the middle of the show is a, is it, is it someone's birthday out? It's just so much birthday. You know, I go, of course, it's going to play birthday. You know, you're going to hear the Beatles. And I love that song. And you know, he probably, you know, he does that. It's always someone's birthday, right? Yeah. There's Jim out there. Let me go, Jim, go. That's interesting because he does call me Jim. And he goes, yeah, is Jim Phelan out there? And I go, what? And then everyone just kind of turned around and kind of looked at me. And I went nuts and I was like, oh my gosh. He goes, I know this is for you. And he's saying, you know, birthdate the Beatles. And then he sang that and it's unbelievable.

3 (1h 15m 6s):
And then he finished, he goes, yeah, that's right. It's Jim's birthday. I sick of saying it. And I go, oh my gosh, it's like a 10 minute bit. He's doing, he goes, yeah, happy. And he sang the regular happy birthday to the whole Barkley center, sang it to me. And I go and someone has a great photo of it. And it's me next to Lauren Michaels and my wife, Nancy, and it's in my office. And I go, if I was 12 year old me or 13 year old meat, looking at this photo and go, dude, you are going to be sitting next to your idol at a Paul McCartney concert where he's singing to you. And that gorgeous girl you're married to.

3 (1h 15m 48s):
It's the greatest photo I could have ever taken or seen in my life

1 (1h 15m 55s):
That Jimmy Fallon host of the tonight show with Jimmy Fallon and CEO of the production company, electric hot dog, by the way, every few months on the show, Jimmy has a segment called Fallon inventions. He invites kids to come on and show off their inventions. For example, one kid came up with gloves embedded with small wooden blocks. It allows you to clap for your favorite team at winter sports events. Another kid, a 12 year old invented a cat carrier with a plastic slide on the bottom to help pull out the cat safely without getting scratched. Jimmy also showed off some of his inventions, including over your headphones shaped like giant ears.

1 (1h 16m 39s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you want to contact the team, our email address is H IBT at ID dot <inaudible> dot com. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this in mind is at guy Roz and on Instagram I'm at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by REM Tina bluey. It was edited by Neeva grant with a research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes a lane coats, John Isabella, Liz Metzker, Carrie Thompson, Catherine cipher, Alex Chung, Christmas uni, Carla <inaudible> and Josh lash. I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

1 (1h 17m 44s):
Hey everyone. So I want to make sure you know, all of the different ways you can listen to how I built this. As you probably know, you can follow the show on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now, but a one let you know that you can actually listen to the next episode of how I built this today. One week early on Amazon music, you can also listen to it early and ad free by subscribing to Wondery plus an apple podcasts or on the Wondery app. Please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. And another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks.

Against the Odds (1h 18m 25s):
Hey, I'm Cassie to Pechal the host of wonder podcast against the odds and our next season. A group of high school students and their adult guides set out to climb Mount hood, the tallest peak in Oregon. But when the weather turns treacherous, the students are trapped in a whiteout and forced to dig a snow cave to survive an elite rescue team sets out to find the missing students, but conditions are so bad. Even they face grave danger, follow against the Oz on apple podcasts, Amazon music, or wherever you're listening now.