0 (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

1 (10s):
Think of all the things you can do in 10 minutes or less. Scroll through social media. Check your bank balance, make a sandwich, or learn about the surprising economics behind all these things. The Indicator for Plan of Money is a quick hit of insight into the economics of business, work, and everyday life. Every weekday in less than 10 minutes. Listen now to the Indicator podcast from NPR.

2 (32s):
When you find something you love, you stick with it. Like this podcast and like working out with Peloton and with up to $950 off Peloton purchases this holiday, bring home a Peloton bike, bike plus, or tread and workout like nobody's watching. Unleash Yourself. Ride, run box, or freak the hit out. It's your workout, your rules. I always find myself looking forward to my next ride with Peloton. For Pelotons best offers of the season now extended through December 5th. Head to www do one peloton.ca/offers all access membership. Separate terms apply

3 (1m 10s):
Hello listeners. this is Mike Cory of Against The. Odds. You might know that I adventure around the world while recording this podcast. And. over the years, I've learned that where I stay when I travel can make all the difference. Airbnb has been my go to place for finding the perfect accommodations because with hotels, you often don't have the luxury of extra space or Privacy. Recently, I had a bunch of friends come down to visit in Mexico. we found this large house and the place had a pool, a barbecue, a kitchen, and a great big living room to play cards, watch movies, and just chill out. It honestly made all the difference in the trip. It felt like we were all roommates again, The, next time you planning a trip, whether it's with friends, family, or yourself, check out Airbnb to find something you won't forget.

0 (2m 4s):
Hey, everyone, just wanna let you know that this week our team is taking a much needed break. So we chose one of our favorite episodes from the archives. Here it is, and hope you enjoy it. Hello and welcome to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So about 60% of all food waste in the US comes from restaurants, hotels, grocery stores, and food service companies. That's according to the nonprofit Feeding America. And so much of that food is really great every day. At the end of the day, most bakeries and cafes and restaurants throw away what's left. Some of them donate it if they can, but that's not always easy.

0 (2m 47s):
So back in 2016, a young French entrepreneur named Lucie Basch joined forces with a group of Danish entrepreneurs to try and repurpose food that would otherwise get tossed. They found it too good to go, and it's a platform that connects restaurants with consumers. So sort of like Airbnb for leftovers, a customer can log onto the app, order a surprise bag of food from their favorite bakery or cafe, usually for five or six bucks, and then go and pick up whatever's left. At the end of the day. Too good to go is now in 17 countries, including in cities across the us. Lucie came to the idea after working at Nestle in the uk, and while she was working on the production lines for chocolate bars and coffee capsules, she noticed a problem.

5 (3m 37s):
At Nestle, it's all about how can we produce faster and cheaper? And, you know, there is nothing around how can we improve the health of our consumers? How can we make it better for the environment? How can we make the food more nutritious? And you know, I I remember working on, on Kit Kat and working on the, on different type of pet foods or water bottles, and for all of them, it's the same principle, is like the, the line needs to run faster. We need to make sure that there is as much as possible, many products that we can sell. And therefore, even when we talk about waste, it's not really a problem in itself in terms of it doesn't make sense to waste food.

5 (4m 18s):
It's more a problem in itself because it costs more money. So really quickly, I end up being in a, in a place where I do projects that make us save tons of money, but often produce more waste because you would make the line run faster and therefore there would be more defects. So more products that would end up being thrown away. But the marginal cost of every product is still lower, and therefore everyone is happy. And we celebrate that as a huge success for the factory. And, and that's where really I, I started to realize that my values and what I was doing every day, it started to be a disconnect.

5 (4m 58s):
Really. Hmm.

0 (4m 59s):
What, what did you start to think about? I mean, what you, you say it was a disconnect and, and so where, what did you start to think about in terms of what you thought you wanted to do?

5 (5m 10s):
I, I, I think at that time, you know, I had always been sensitive to food waste, but really in the factory I realized how huge the issue was. You know, we all, we all see food waste in our daily lives, both in like when you go to a restaurant and you see people living stuff in their, in their plates, or you go to the supermarkets and you see bins filled with food. But that time I realized that at the industrial level, it was even bigger. And then I started to look into numbers and start to get interested into food waste. And then I realized that today we throw away 40% of the food we produce on the planet.

5 (5m 52s):
Hmm. And I don't know, but that, that number really hit me. And I was like, this is impossible to accept for me, and everyone should know about that number and everyone should have ways to fight against it. And so the, the whole idea for me was, how can you make everyone a waste warrior? And how can you make everyone capable of fighting food waste? And, and that's when the idea of Togo Togo started to, to emerge in my head slowly.

0 (6m 23s):
Right. So you have this idea in your head of like, is there a way that we could repurpose food from stores or restaurants that, that are, that can't be sold anymore? Like, what was the idea that you started to have in your head?

5 (6m 37s):
So I've always been fascinated by the, what I call the horizontal power, where actually when every one of us, we do our little bits for a common cause, then we can have a huge impact together. And so it was this idea of like, if I make everyone able to save one meal every day, then we can really fight food waste at a huge scale and, and really make a difference. So the OO idea was to use an app to enable every one of us to, at the end of the day, pick up a meal and make sure that we can eat this food instead of throwing it away.

0 (7m 16s):
So let's, let's take a bakery for example. At the end of the day, you know, a bakery's going to throw away a lot of its products on the shelves, and some of it they might sell next day for half price, you know, day old bread or something. And you, you go to a bakery and you see that, but you wanted to create sort of a systemized way for shops or restaurants to essentially sell those things in an easier way.

5 (7m 42s):
Exactly that. So it's how do you make sure that the baker at the end of the day, which is about to throw away some croon and sandwiches and, and breads, is connected with someone like you and me living in the area that can come and, and pick up this food. So that, that's really the way the app works. The Baker doesn't really know what exactly what they're gonna throw away, but they know that every night they have food left when they're about to close. And this food is, is fresh, right? So you can't sell it the day after, but it's still perfectly good to be eaten because 10 minutes earlier you were selling it at full price. The idea of to Good to Go is that instead of throwing this away, you actually put it into some surprise bags that are sold on the app for a third of the price, and that one of our consumer will come and pick up.

5 (8m 31s):
And so as a consumer, you actually select the stores you like. We, we talked about bakeries, but you can imagine like pizza places and bagels and sushi and supermarkets even. And so you pay a small price on the app between four and $6 basically. And then at the closing time you come, you show your receipt on your phone, and then you get a bag filled with food for three times the price you paid for it.

0 (8m 57s):
And, and you don't know exactly what's in there, but you can guess based on what the store is. I mean, if it's a bagel shop, you know, this can be bagels in there. You got it. And and you were doing this in, in France?

5 (9m 7s):
No, I was actually in Norway at the time. And so when I stopped working at Nestle in the uk, I moved to Scandinavia and that's when I started to also look for people to do that food waste project with me. So, you know, you, we often hear that when you have a great idea, you you should really protect it and not share it too much because some people could steal it. I was really at the extreme opposite of that. For me, when you have an id, you better share it and you better talk about it to as many people as possible because that will help you to make that Id more relevant. You will see how people react to your id, so it'll help you actually grow your id, but also make it closer to reality.

5 (9m 53s):
Hmm. At the end of the day, an ID is worth nothing. What matters is the way you make it real. And so while talking to many people about that idea I had of a, of an app that could connect people and local stores to fight food waste together, I realized that there were some other people working on a similar id. And those were four Danish guys in Copenhagen that were actually starting the, the exact same project as I wanted to start. So when I first got a little bit anxious and, and worried that I had already met some competitors when I was not even started myself, I soon realized that, you know, maybe those are my co-founders and and maybe it's something we could actually do together.

0 (10m 41s):
What happens? You do, you do you reach out to them and say, Hey, maybe we should meet up and, and talk about what we're doing?

5 (10m 49s):
Yeah, exactly. You know, I actually went to a conference in Oslo that was called Collaboration is the new competition, and saying that if you really care about something, if you really want to do a project that you care about, then instead of doing it against each other, you better do it together. And, and I guess that that was enough to convince me that, that I could actually just do it with those people and therefore I just, you know, found their numbers online and gave them a call. And, and literally it was, it was pretty funny because at that time they were, so, they had just started to build a website in Copenhagen to work on that in Denmark, but they had gotten some PR in Norway and therefore one of their friend who was Norwegian was taking the night bus from Copenhagen to Norway to come and start to, to see if it could work in a way.

0 (11m 44s):
And by the way, they were doing something slightly different from what I understand. They were, they were working with like buffet restaurants, right. To sell excess food from a buffet at the end of the day.

5 (11m 55s):
Yeah, exactly. So I think we've all seen those buffet of like all you can eat. Yeah. Which at the end of the day, obviously there is still some food left. And so they had thought about the app that would enable you to, you come and you get a, you get, you get a, a box, a take away box that you can fill with whatever is left on the buffet. So that was their idea. When, of course for me as a French person, I immediately saw about the bakery and therefore, you know, it was a similar concept of you get a bag or a box filled with food that is left over, but it was just different type of stores.

0 (12m 29s):
And what do you say to them when you, when you met them? Like, Hey, I, I have this idea. Can I join you? Can we join together? What, what was your pitch?

5 (12m 38s):
Yeah, exactly. I mean, I didn't really have a pitch. I called and I said, Hey, I'm working on the same id, where are you? How do you work with it? How is it working in Copenhagen? And then like, really quickly, they asked me like, where are you based? I said, I'm in Oslo. And therefore they were pretty excited because as I said, just the day after, one of them was coming to Oslo. So they were like, you know what, just grab a beer meat and, and then we'll see how we can make it work. And, and literally, I guess a couple of days later, I was in stores pitching half in Norwegian, half in English to try and convince stores to, to join our, to join our concept that, you know, at, at that time we had nothing.

5 (13m 20s):
I mean, we didn't have a flyer, we didn't have an app, we didn't have anything that was actually working, but we were passionate and, and I guess that helped us convince many people,

0 (13m 31s):
This is in, I think February or early 2016 when you joined. And so you, you, their concept was all you can eat. And you were saying, well, let's also do bakeries and cafes, you know, individual stores because they also have things that they throw away at the end of the day. And so you, you literally started to go like to stores or, or cafes in Oslo pitching them on this idea saying, Hey, if you have excess food, we can connect you to consumers.

5 (13m 60s):
Yeah, exactly. So Sophie was, was the one in the night bus. And, and I met her, we grabbed the beer and literally the day after we, we went pitching together and, and the pitch was simple, right? It was like, you, you have food at the end of the day, it makes no sense for you to throw it away first because no one likes to throw food away, especially when you've put a lot of hard work and, and money behind it, but also because it costs you money to throw food away. So the idea was, let us help you, and at the end of the day, it'll take you no more time than throwing food away. People that will have already paid online, welcome at the time you want, and pick up a, a bit, a big bag filled with with the food you have left.

5 (14m 47s):
So the promise was, it won't be harder than throwing food away, but also you will get new customers through your doors and you will get some extra money as well. So why say no.

0 (14m 58s):
And, and who, who, what was the first cafe or shop that you signed up in Oslo? Well, what kind of store was it?

5 (15m 4s):
Well, it was actually a bakery store. So it was a, a guy that owned four bakeries actually. And yeah, he had been throwing away for, for years. Really? So the first thing he told me was, you know, it's part of my job throw away. I I have to accept it. I've tried to contact charities for very long time, but they would never come for that little food. They also can't come in the city center at a peak of traffic. So I just accepted that there is no other solution for me. And it was really about, you know, changing his mindsets around the fact that yes, there is a solution and we can make it work for you and you, we can make it easy.

0 (15m 44s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back more from Lucie Basch about launching and growing too. Good to go stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This Lab. As a business to business marketer, your needs are unique. B2B buying cycles are long and your customers face incredibly complex decisions. Isn't it? Time you had a marketing platform built specifically for you? LinkedIn ads empowers marketers with solutions for you and your customers. LinkedIn ads allow you to build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers in a respectful environment you'll have direct access to and build relationships with decision makers.

0 (16m 31s):
That's 950 million members, 180 million senior level executives and 10 million c-level executives. 79% of B2B content marketers said LinkedIn produces the best results for paid media. So many of the brands on this show and How, I, Built This use LinkedIn to reach customers every single day. I know because they tell me. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get a hundred dollars credit on your next campaign. Go to linkedin.com slash built this to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com slash built. This. Terms and conditions apply.

7 (17m 10s):
The mushroom mozzarella burger is back at a w for a limited time. Sauteed cremini mushrooms and gooey mozzarella cheese are the perfect combination of yum on top of a juicy grass-fed beef patty. So get it while you can at a and w

0 (17m 32s):
Welcome back to How I Built This Lab. My guest today is Lucie Basch, the entrepreneur who started a company that connects cafes and restaurants to customers willing to buy leftover food at a reduced price. So let's talk about the, the sort of the logistics of putting this together. I mean, were the others in, in Copenhagen? Were they able to build an app or, or were you able to do it?

5 (17m 57s):
So I, I tried very hard, but I wasn't, it was not really productive what I was, what I was coding. No, actually, yeah, one of the, one of the Danish guys were a developer, so he was the one, you know, really just coding the app and fully focused on that. But originally we just had a website and we started with WordPress like many companies do, I guess. Yeah. And then slowly we had a an MVP minimum viable product, which just enabled us to, to show the app and the concept to the stores we were pitching. And then slowly but surely we started to have an app that would work better, that was becoming as well, more and more automated.

5 (18m 38s):
But, you know, for I guess the first two years the app was always breaking down. Our payments module would never work. And literally every time we had big media that we were on TV that suddenly a lot of people would download the app, everything would crash, right. The servers, the app. And so I think the first two years, like our average on the app store was two stores. Everyone said like, I tried to download it, it doesn't work. I have no stores around me, this is crap. And like we literally, we, we kept on going, but, but it was tough, right? Because when your product doesn't work perfectly, it's it's hard to, to sell it to everyone.

0 (19m 17s):
And I think in the first two years it was bootstrapped, right? Like you guys were just, you know, kind of not taking salaries and just you were trying to build it without any outside investments.

5 (19m 30s):
Yeah, yeah, exactly. So we didn't have investments for the first year. So I actually, after a few months I moved back to France to launch the ID there as well. And I was lucky enough that I, I just went back to my parents, but, you know, I had no nothing else than work and sleep. So at least you don't spend a lot of money then

0 (19m 50s):
In, in, in that first year. I mean, literally signing up stores and, you know, little businesses to join, you'd have to go sh store by store and talk to the, the, to the owners. I mean, how, how did you make that process more efficient and, you know, in order to get lots of people to join?

5 (20m 6s):
Yeah, I, I got a bike so I could go faster in the streets. No, it was really door to door and I had never done that before. So what we made more efficient was, yeah, have flyers after a while and you could leave your number on it. Then slowly we, we started to realize that it was more efficient to call first and then try and book a meeting with the owner. 'cause the biggest issue we had was like the owner was never in the store, so we could talk to the, the guy at the, but they wouldn't have the decision power to, to say yes or no. So for us it was really important to have the decision maker. And so we moved slowly to phones and sometime it was working, sometime it was not.

5 (20m 49s):
I think one of the great assets we started to quickly have was that we had great brands joining us both, you know, independent stores that everyone know, but also like bigger brands.

0 (20m 60s):
What which, which was the first big brand that you, you signed up?

5 (21m 3s):
So we had a Eric Kaiser, the bakery, and that's like, that's really well known and it's really good quality as well. And for me it was so important to, to get those high quality brands because they would lead the way and show to others that it's the new, it's the new way to do food today. Yeah. It's not throw it away.

0 (21m 24s):
And I'm curious, Lucie, when you would go to like Eric Kaiser for example, was it, was it like an easy pitch? I mean it, 'cause it, it seems like it, you know, you would go in, you would explain the concept and, and they were like, yeah, I'm, I'm, I'm I'm good to go. Or, or were any of them skeptical? Were any of them like, well, what's in it for you?

5 (21m 42s):
No, no, of course A lot of skepticism at the beginning. I mean, first I think their main worry was like, it's gonna take too much time. I can't be bothered and anyway, it's not gonna work. So that's why I had to convince them that it would be as simple as throwing food away and therefore, you know, it was, that's why we use the idea of the surprise bag is that you don't have to like do an inventory of everything you have left. Just say, I have three bags tonight, and then just whatever you have left at the end of the day, you just put it in there. So I think that was a huge argument. And then a second big thing was they were worried to feel like they were discounting their products, especially the very high brand, you know, they, they, they would've never done discounting.

0 (22m 28s):
Yeah. Right. If you're, if you're, if you're like Kaiser, right? And you're selling a croissant for five to $7 and then, and, and the customer knows that they get it for two, at the end of the day, that's a problem. Right? And so what was your solution to the problem?

5 (22m 45s):
So first the solution is that they don't sell a croissant for a third of the price. They sell a surprise bag and you never know if you're gonna get croissant or bread, but if you know that you, that you need bread, food tonight, then you can't choose to get to go. Right? Then you would need to actually go to Kaiser and, and get that food.

0 (23m 3s):
But if you didn't care what you were gonna get, as long as you, you know, you knew it was gonna be tasty food, you just get a bag filled with stuff that you don't know what it is and you're only gonna pay five bucks and you might love it or you might like some of it, but that's what you're gonna get.

5 (23m 18s):
Yeah, I know I love everything in a bakery, but I don't know,

0 (23m 22s):
I don't like raisins. If you gimme raisins, I feel like I've, I feel like I've lost just raisins I've lost.

5 (23m 28s):
But then you'll give it to someone who love raisins. I'm sure you have some friends who love raisins.

0 (23m 33s):
I have to, I have to build another app to find the person who wants a raisins. Alright, so you go to these businesses and, and you convince them that this was gonna be good for them and it was gonna help them sell excess products and they were gonna make some money off of it. But understandably some of them were worried about devaluing their brand.

5 (23m 53s):
And, and that's where, for me it was all about showing them that, you know, the new way of doing things right is to do them sustainably and honestly understanding that today we throw away 40% of the food we produce on the planet, that this is responsible for about 10% of greenhouse gases emission. And that still nearly a billion people go to bed hungry every night. It's like, how can you say you do quality food if you don't fight against that? And so for me it was actually make it part of your brand to take care of your products until the very end versus say that you're doing discounting products. Yeah,

0 (24m 32s):
It's almost like ride sharing or, or home sharing, right? In a sense that essentially you're saying, look, we're platform, we're gonna connect you to consumers. You've got, in the case of Airbnb an extra room in your house, you can make some money, you know, renting out your room, you're saying to these bakeries, look, you can make money selling your excess products and it's food that would otherwise be wasted. And, and we will take a, we will take a fee off of that, but ultimately you're gonna make, you know, marginally more money by doing this

5 (25m 4s):
Exactly that. So it's a win win win, right? I mean, as a, as the, as the store owner, you stop throwing food away, you get money for it, and you show your products to new co new customers as a consumer, you get food for a third of the price and you do something for fighting food waste and it's too good to go. We can build a great business model on a, on a solution that really makes a difference for fighting food waste. Yeah.

0 (25m 28s):
And, and just, just, I'm just curious, your business model depends obviously on a commission, so it's free for the business to be on the platform, essentially all, all you guys do is take a commission from the sale.

5 (25m 43s):
Yeah, exactly. So it's, it's only a success fee, right? So as a consumer, anyone can download the app and start saving a meal and as a consumer you'll just pay $5, you'll get $15 worth of food. As a store owner, it's the same. You just go on our website and on the same day you can start saving food and, and be registered on the app. You won't pay anything for that. And every time you save a meal, we'll take a fixed commission on the meal you've saved. Yeah.

0 (26m 9s):
Alright, so let's say like, I wanna, I I go to El Toro Taqueria in San Francisco, right? And I'm like, okay, I see there's a surprise bag, it's 5 99 and I don't know where I'm gonna get, I've never been there, but it looks pretty good actually a picture and, and I pay 5 99 through the app and then I go there and I show them my receipt and I get my bag and I go home and open it up and it is where it is. What outta that 5 99? What, what, what is your cut? What is it cut for to Good to go?

5 (26m 38s):
So 1 79 goes to to Good to Go and everything else goes back to the store,

0 (26m 43s):
Right? The, I guess the argument that you are, you are, you would be making to businesses is you're leaving money on the table if you don't actually do this 'cause you're just throwing it away.

5 (26m 52s):
Yeah, exactly. I mean there, there is no reason to say no. Once you've understood that the way to Good to Go works and that you recognize you have food waste every night, then even if it's very little, right? I mean, just realize that thanks to that you will stop throwing away food. And honestly, for the people doing that every night, it's, it's definitely great news that you don't have to feel a big, a big trash bag every night. But also, you know, it's, you've, you've just said it right? You've never been there, but thanks to the app, you might go there, you might discover the food they do, and then the day after you're hungry for lunch and you loved what you got in your surprise bag the day before and you're just going back there and paying full price because now you're aware that this store is selling this kind of food.

0 (27m 36s):
And the idea is really to work with sort of cafes and restaurants rather than like supermarkets for example.

5 (27m 44s):
No, we wanna work with everyone, you know, everywhere there is food waste to get to go, should, should be there as well. So of course it, it takes more time to, to roll it out with huge chains. But they are more than welcome to be with us because dairy impact can be huge. I mean, in Europe, 50% of the food we save every day comes from grocery partners in supermarkets.

0 (28m 6s):
And what are they, what are they putting in the surprise bags, for example?

5 (28m 9s):
Well, many things that that come to expiry dates, I mean fruit, vegetable, but also dairy products, also meat and fish breads as well. Anything really that they have in the store. We actually did a huge work on expiry dates because we realized that people didn't necessarily make the difference between a sale buy and a used buy. And the problem with that is even if you can still eat the product after the sell by date, people don't really think about it. And therefore products that are being removed from the shelves, even so they are still good to be eaten and they are still allowed to be sold. But therefore we did a, a whole work to, to sende people to understand that there are two different dates, but also that the product is still good to be eaten and therefore every time that the, the staff in, in the supermarkets are removing products from the shelves, instead of putting it in the bin, they actually put it in a, in a to good to go bag and, and people can come to the supermarket and collect it as well.

5 (29m 13s):
For supermarket it's great because it's, it's a good way of cross-selling because you know, if you're gonna pick up your surprise bag, you better do your, your grocery shopping as well.

0 (29m 22s):
And so 2019 you're starting to launch, you go to Italy and, and Portugal and Poland, and you're still mainly in Europe at that time, I believe. Tell me about how, how you were able to, you know, launch in so many countries.

5 (29m 37s):
Yeah, we, we stayed in Europe until mid 2020 where we launched 15 countries in Europe. So it was, I mean, it was definitely fast, right? We were launching like a country every, every quarter or every second quarter. And you know, it was always the same mindset as a country will become profitable between 16 and 24 months, and then you will pay for the next one

0 (30m 2s):
Between 16 and 24 months it becomes profitable. Wow. We're gonna take another quick break, but when we come back, Lucie shares how too good to go navigated its US launch in the middle of a global pandemic. Stay with us. You're listening to How I Built This Lab.

9 (30m 24s):
Hey there. I know that life is full of challenges, but that's not necessarily a bad thing. Asto philosopher once said that no man is more unhappy than he who never faces adversity for he is not permitted to prove himself. I'm Ryan Holiday, the bestselling author and host of The Daily Stoic podcast, a podcast where I break down the ancient teachings from the Stoic philosophers so you can apply their thinking to the problems of modern life. On the daily sto you'll find everything from insightful conversations to people like Matthew McConaughey and Gary V on how they've used stoicism in their own life to short 10 minute teachings on how to deal with fear and build better habits. Ancient philosophy doesn't have to be this inaccessible, impractical thing on The Daily Stoic.

9 (31m 6s):
You can learn how to bring the values of stoicism into your own life one day at a time. Follow The Daily Stoic on the Wondery app or wherever you get your podcasts, and you can listen to The Daily Stoic early and ad free Right now on Wondery Plus.

0 (31m 26s):
Welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Roz and I'm talking with Lucie Basch who saw that food waste is a huge global problem and turned fighting it into a for-profit company. It sounds like as you, you know, went from country to country, it became easier or did it still, was it still a hurdle to convincing businesses to, to join?

5 (31m 50s):
No, I think, you know, we really built our credibility years after years and people started to hear about us, people started to believe that it works and that as a store owner, you don't have to throw food away at the end of the day anymore. And our, our US launch was very rapid as well, even so we launched just after COVID, it, it was a pretty crazy bet to, to still go to the US in, in August, 2020 and decided that it was time for to, to go to be live there. But we did, and a lot of stores were really happy to see us coming. Some of them had heard about us from Europe. And today, you know, just a couple of years later, we, we are in 12,000 stores in the us

0 (32m 31s):
12,000 stores. Yeah.

5 (32m 33s):
So we've already saved more than 4 million meals in the us but there is so much more we could save. Yeah,

0 (32m 40s):
You guys raised I think more than $30 million in venture capital in 2020. And from what I've read, you were reluctant to do that for a while. So what, what changed your minds?

5 (32m 51s):
Yeah, I mean, you know, for us it was so important to be fully mission focused and, and to, to stay through to our DNA that we thought VCs and, and the financial world will maybe force us to change that or I don't know, we were not really trusting that it, it would be possible to have a, a true financial partner that would respect our vision and our DNA. And then we, we found some that actually shared our values. The first VC we raised from is called Bliss. It's a B Corp venture capital based between between France and the us And you know, I don't know if you're familiar with the B Corp certification, but it's, it's really about building businesses that are, are good for society.

5 (33m 35s):
And the fact that we had a VC that took that certification put us in in good trust already. But also when, when we started to engage with them, we realized that the questions they were asking were different from other VCs and they were not only interested in our financial KPIs, but also really in the way we were doing business. And, and for us it's definitely about doing both, right? It's not only about the way we do business, it's really about the, the KPIs we hit and our financial targets, but it's also really about the way we deal with our consumers to the, the way we deal with our partners, the way we work with our employees, and how good we are with diversity, equity, and inclusion.

5 (34m 16s):
And those are all, you know, things that we continuously want to improve on and will never be perfect, but it, it's things that are top of mind. And it was important for us that any financial partners would also care about the way we do that.

0 (34m 29s):
You know, obviously what you, what what you guys were building was a business, a social enterprise, right, with a mission, but it's still a business that had to be sustainable, that had to make money. And so the question is, given your background and your interest in mission oriented work, why didn't you guys just do do it as a nonprofit?

5 (34m 53s):
Well, for me it's, it's that whole thing that businesses need to be so with, with a purpose and a mission for the world. We truly believe that, you know, when you build, it shouldn't be that either you build a charity to help the world or you build a business to make money, right? TID is really to show that social businesses, social impact businesses can, can do both and should do both. Because if you, if you want to have an impact, you actually need to have a strong business model that can maximize that impact. Yeah. And you know, really quickly and to Good to Go, we were able to launch many countries.

5 (35m 35s):
We were able to raise some funds and, and therefore launch always more countries. And, and in seven years we, we managed to, to launch the concept in 17 countries. Yeah. We, we saved several hundred millions of, of meals with the app. We have more than 75 million consumers in the world. And it's really thanks to our business model that we could actually maximize our impact.

0 (36m 0s):
That, that's my question, right? Because I guess had you been a charity, right? You might still have an impact, of course charities have a huge impact, but I guess the argument could be, could be made that, like you, you might not be as flexible as you as you could be as a, as a for-profit business or as efficient as you have to be as a, for like, the stakes are higher, right? When, when there are investors involved and there's money involved that it forces you to really maximize the efficiency of what you're doing and to I guess scale it in a way that maybe you couldn't if you were a, a charity.

5 (36m 35s):
Yeah, indeed. I I think businesses, it's, it's a bit of a different pace. It's a bit of a different ambition in a way. Yeah. And, and also we spend time saving meals. We don't spend time trying to find, get

0 (36m 47s):
Donors

5 (36m 48s):
And Yeah, exactly right. So for me, we, I really wanted to spend times with, with my consumers and my stores and, and not spend a lot of time with begging people to, to finance us. But it, it's also because I, I truly believe that we need to rethink companies as great vehicle to change the world. And, and I think that's what we prove is to good to go is it's not impact or profit. You can do both and you should do both.

0 (37m 15s):
So as you know, Lucie, there is criticism, of course there's always gonna be criticism anytime you start a business or do something. And that comes the territory. And, and, and I think some of the criticism is perfectly fair and reasonable that, you know, businesses like too Good to Go undercut the work of charities that, that they're essentially only enabling people who have money to access this food. And, and it's simply being consumed by, you know, by, by people who are already wealthy or already have access to, to food when in fact really the food should be redistributed to people who are hungry or homeless or, or whatever. How do you, how do you respond when you hear that?

5 (37m 56s):
Of course, of course. I mean, you know, today charities do an amazing job and we have worked really closely with Charity from The Star. We are in partnership with many of them locally. Every time we launch a city, we have a charity partner. We work with many food banks across all our countries. But the thing is that today charities can't pick up all the food, right? And they've been live for many years and we still throw away 40% of the food, we produce many of it coming from our local stores. So for us, it's, it's really about how can we compliment the jobs, the, the work that charities do. We always say to our stores, and especially to grocery stores who work a lot with charity, that it's first give everything you can to the charities, give everything they wanna take to them, and then will come whatever is left after that.

5 (38m 49s):
And, and that's really what to, to Go is for, is whatever the charities can't take because they can't come and pick up the food or because they don't have the infrastructure or because the people they feed are not interested by this type of product, then the rest is for to good to go. And also, don't take me wrong, I mean, many people using to good to go need to good to go to feed themselves. It's not because you don't go to the food bank that you have plenty of money and that you don't struggle at the end of the month. Hmm. And for us, that's really also the people we address is the people who, you know, are really happy they can multiply their purchasing buyer by three. And that actually we received so many testimony and, and letters from people who really thank us because many people feed themselves with too good to go morning lunch and, and dinner.

5 (39m 40s):
So for us it's really about making it accessible to everyone to fight food waste.

0 (39m 46s):
Presumably the idea is to is for this to be available everywhere around the world and and for any kind of food product that could be wasted to be sold on this platform. Is that, is that the mission?

5 (39m 57s):
Yes, for sure. We wanna build a global movement for fighting food waste. We want any one of us to be able to do our little bits in the fight against food waste. And you know, today we save three meals every second. Imagine how huge that is. And I still remember myself counting the daily meals one by one with my finger on the screen today. I'm happy we have a great data team to do that. But, but yeah, we, we wanna save every meal on the planet from every store, from every locations. The US is definitely a huge challenge for us because it's a huge country. So we've launched in Canada as well. This market is, is growing incredibly, incredibly well as well.

5 (40m 39s):
And you know, later it should be South America, it should be Australia, it should be Asia, Africa, I mean all the continents Will, will eventually join, join the, the fight against food waste. And then, you know, it's, it's really about the whole food chain as well. We just acquired a company called CO that helps grocery stores to, to really do their shelf rotation in a, in a smarter way. And co really tells them if, if they should discount the product in the store, if they should give it to a charity or if they should save it on ticket to go. And that's the idea is how can we really become the food waste partners of all the food partners in the world and therefore we start to work with industrials as well.

5 (41m 24s):
So that's all the food I've seen. Nestle being thrown away is not thrown away anymore. It's actually being sent, being shipped in a Togo parcel directly to consumers who are fine to, to get those products as well at a better price.

0 (41m 38s):
Do are you working with Nestle?

5 (41m 40s):
We are actually on all the work we do on the on date labeling to make it easier for consumers to understand and also to sometimes make the expiry dates longer. Nestle was one of the, of the first partners to join our work on the on date labeling, and now we wanna do more with them and, and really help them to, to improve the way they handle food and, and make sure that their bins are, are totally empty eventually.

0 (42m 5s):
I'm sure this has seemed like a long journey, but it's only been around for six years or so. What does this look like in, in five years or 10 years from now?

5 (42m 15s):
Yeah, indeed, indeed. It's been intense. So for me, I'm, I'm just so happy when I think about, you know, the are hundred thousands of people that every day go and go on the ticket to Go app and then go to their local store and, and save that food and yeah, again, saving three meals every second is, is is pretty impressive. But we can do so much more. There is a lot we do as well on the, on public affairs. We've started a a school program as well to help teachers talk about food waste to their, to their students because we believe that, you know, as young as six years old, you should start hearing about what you can do and, and start teaching your parents at home as well.

5 (42m 56s):
So, so the idea of to Good to Go again is, is not only about being an app, it's really about generating a, a movement where people start changing the mindset around food and start really caring about food because we've lost, touched a little bit with, with the way we produce food and, and I think it's so important that today we realize that this is so essential, right? We, we saw it during Covid, but food is the, is the one thing that we can't, we can't remove from our lives. And, and, and whoever you are or wherever you were born, whatever you do in, in your, in your days, you are confronted to food every day. So it's, it's so important that we spend time and money on it and that once we have it, we, we really take care of it and, and eat up our plates.

0 (43m 43s):
That's Lucie Basch co-founder of Two. Good to go. Lucie, thank you so much.

5 (43m 48s):
Thank you.

0 (43m 50s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to How I Built This Lab. Please do follow us on your podcast app so you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Raz. And on Instagram, I'm at Guy Raz. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com. This episode was produced by Sam Paulson with editing by John Isabella and research by Lauren Landell Einhorn. Our music was composed by Sam Paulson and Rum Arablouei Our audio engineer was Neal Rauch. Our production team at How I Built This includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Chris Mess, Elaine Coates, JC Howard, Liz Metzger, Kerry Thompson, Carla Estevez, and Kiro Joaquin.

0 (44m 38s):
Eva Grant is our supervising editor. Beth Donovan is our executive producer. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right. Now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts, Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

10 (45m 14s):
You are doing a lot of shopping this holiday season, but are you saving a lot? With Rakuten, you can save big on holiday gifts from your favorite brands. They give shoppers like you cash back on top of the biggest sales of the year. Earn cash back at stores like Sephora, old Navy and Expedia. Rakuten even helps you find the best coupons, deals and sales. Just start your shopping with Rakuten to save money at over 750 stores. Join for free@rakuten.ca or get the Rakuten app. That's R-A-K-U-T-E-N.