wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I Built This early and ad free Right. now join Wondery. Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts

IATA Performance Network (10s):
effective ad spend that results in verified incremental sales is more important than ever. That's why you need the IATA Performance Network partnering with over 2000 industry leading brands. The Iboa Performance Network or IPN, is the number one consumer rewards platform for brands and retailers. They deliver targeted promotions, incremental sales, and unrivaled data analytics to measure real-time sales in stores and online and advertisers on the IPN. See an average 50% lift in incremental units sold. Lock in your campaign today and start seeing those incremental sales flowing in for your brand with the IDA Performance Network. Visit ipn.ida.com/built today to learn more. That's ipn.ida.com/built today to learn more. Don't forget, that's ipn.ida.com/built terms and conditions apply

Canva (1m 9s):
with Canva. you don't need to be a designer to design compelling on-brand content. In fact, our team uses Canva to create episode artwork, social media posts and graphics for our website. Canva has endless templates for things like presentations, business documents, brainstorms, posters and more. And you can even create your own custom brand templates for your team to use. And with Canva Magic Resize, you can quickly resize your designs for any social platform. Canva is used by 85% of Fortune 500 companies. Whether you work at a small or big brand in a team of two or 2000, Canva empowers teams everywhere to design compelling on-brand visual content together. Start designing today at Canva dot com, the home for every brand.

Capital One (2m 3s):
Here's a little tip for your growing business. Get the new Venture X business card from Capital One and start earning Unlimited double miles on every purchase. That's one of the reasons Jennifer Garner has one for her business. That's right. Jennifer Garner is a business owner and the co-founder of Once Upon a Farm, providers of organic snacks and meals loved by little ones and their parents with Unlimited double miles, the more once upon a farm spends the more miles they earn. Plus the Venture X business card has no preset spending limit, so their purchasing power can adapt to meet their business needs. The card also gets their team access to over 1300 airport lounges. Just imagine where the Venture X business card from Capital One can take your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Terms and conditions apply. Find out more@capitalone.com slash venture X business

0 (2m 53s):
Hey. everyone You know every time I run into a How, I, Built This fan, the first thing they wanna do is tell me about their favorite episode, which is so awesome, So. now I, wanna share your favorite episode with the millions of people who listen to this show episodes they might not have heard or might wanna hear again. So here's what I want you to do. Grab your smartphone and record a short memo short like less than 30 seconds, and tell us your name, where you live, and which episode is your favorite, and why you loved it. So for example, I might say, Hey, it's Guy Raz here in San Francisco, and my favorite episode of the show is the one about Hamdi, Lakay and Chobani, because I learned so much about how to just push through and nothing seems to be working out.

0 (3m 38s):
And it gave me a whole new perspective on being resilient. So that's it. Something like that. You know, and by the way, that's not my favorite episode. I love them all equally. Anyway, once you're done with the recording email or message it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. Thanks so much. You guys are the best. Hello everyone and Welcome to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So as you all know, How I Built This is a show that celebrates mistakes. In fact, I think of this show as a kind of a yellow page as a directory of mistakes.

0 (4m 20s):
And the idea is that by listening to the amazing stories of founders and some of the mistakes they made along the way, you can learn how to avoid them yourself. Well, back in January, 2022, we did an episode on a brand called Dang Foods. It was started by two Brothers Vincent and Andrew Kitirattragarn. And if you haven't heard it, it's worth your time. You can scroll back in the podcast queue to find it or just search Dang Foods in your podcast app. Anyway, Vincent and Andrew have family roots in Thailand, and they wanted to bring Asian inspired snacks to grocery stores. They built Dang into a pretty impressive brand to a point where you could find their rice crackers and energy bars and coconut chips at whole Foods and Target and Walmart.

0 (5m 7s):
But unfortunately, the business ran into trouble and a lot of it had to do with the pandemic. The brothers were faced with a series of difficult choices, try to sell it, try to save it, or declare bankruptcy. Both Vincent and Andrew agreed to come back onto the show to talk about what happened and why it was a really courageous thing to do. Most of us don't like talking about failure or setbacks, but when we do, we can help ourselves and help others understand the value and lessons of those setbacks. When the pandemic hit Vincent and Andrew had to navigate huge changes in consumer demand and then a global supply chain crisis,

1 (5m 51s):
I remember thinking with Andrew, like we really came to the conclusion that it, it was a existential crisis for the business. Yeah. Because two of our three product lines are imported from Thailand. And so when your cost of goods, the freight You know goes from 5% to 30%, that's, that's a big increase.

0 (6m 10s):
Wow. And what I mean, and this was all Covid related, it was just the backlog of shipping. Is that how it was explained to you?

1 (6m 18s):
My understanding it was a supply and demand issue. So people were staying at home and they wanted to buy stuff for their house. And so demand for imported goods increased dramatically and there wasn't enough containers to go around.

0 (6m 32s):
I remember when we had you on the show, and everybody should listen this and go back and listen to it. 'cause it is an awesome story about how you guys started this, this company, and you guys were cooking and kitchens anyway, even when you were on the show, you were not a, a massive company, but you had managed to create a pretty You know significant brand. If you went into any whole Foods, you would see Dang, you would see that label on coconut chips and on rice crackers and, and you still do in many whole Foods. But at the time we spoke, there were challenges. You were not just the shipping challenges, but you, you guys started to see some challenges with the business.

0 (7m 17s):
What was, what was happening at the time?

1 (7m 19s):
Yeah, so going back to 2019, I remember we had just launched our Dang bar. It was a, it was a keto bar with Asian flavors and ingredients, and we had launched it with whole Foods in 2019. The first full year was great, became our number one product line really quickly.

0 (7m 35s):
And keto, just to be clear, that was a smart move. I mean, this is a hot trend. It's not even a trend. I mean, it's a hot diet, right? I mean, and you've got Bulletproof this and all these different brands that are doing keto. Yeah. So this seemed like a, probably like a no-brainer

1 (7m 52s):
At the time. There were no keto bars in the market. We're like, wow, this is such a big opportunity. So we raced to develop it and partner with whole Foods to launch it nationwide. And it did great. Like it was our gonna be our driver of growth in 2020 and beyond. But when Covid hit and people were sheltering in place, they stopped buying energy bars as much because it's a good on the go snack. And when you're staying at home, you just don't buy bars as much. So that line took a hit pretty immediately.

0 (8m 21s):
Was there an initial surge? I mean, I know with like Cliff Bar for example, they were flying off the shelves when Covid hit because people were stockpiling food. So was there an initial spike?

1 (8m 31s):
There was a small initial spike as people were panic buying. But You know as people settled into their new routines of staying at home and not going out to shop at grocery stores, we did see a huge impact on all of our products

0 (8m 48s):
Because you were doing coconut chips, which, which you had a few flavors, rice crackers, and you had a few flavors. And the energy bar showed incredible promise in 2019. It, it seemed like there was a world where that could dominate your, your sales in the future.

1 (9m 7s):
That was the plan, right? And so You know, with the energy bar market being as big as it was, we're like, Hey, You know we, we created this nice niche, we should continue growing it. And so it was, it was kind of heartbreaking to You know face reality when Covid hit and You know and notice that it's not going to grow into what we had hoped. And so that was just the first kind of multiple waves of challenges, I would say the, the the immediate impacts of covid on purchasing habits of snacks and bars. And then the second wave was this supply chain crisis that caused huge spikes in container prices.

0 (9m 49s):
So, alright, so all of a sudden Andrew freight costs skyrocket the cost to ship your goods You know dramatically increase. So I mean, presumably you had to raise prices, right? We

2 (10m 6s):
Did raise prices. There's just so much that you can raise. So with the container prices going up from five K to 22 K in one month, you can't increase your price on shelf by 400%.

0 (10m 22s):
Yeah.

2 (10m 23s):
You just can't, you just can't do it. Like, it's just you, you just need to stomach through it.

0 (10m 28s):
So lemme just acknowledge, I I, I know that this is still recent, what had ha what has happened today, and I really appreciate you guys coming on to talk about it. I think it's really courageous and I think it's also important because as You know, this show is about You know, it's, it's designed to be free Business School masterclass for, for anybody who wants to start a business or is thinking about it or is just inspired by it. And you guys built an inspiring business and brand You know, and it's a great story of how you did it. But of course great businesses, I mean, even ones that we've had on the show don't always make it for a variety of reasons.

0 (11m 9s):
Covid was You know a, a Black Swan event and had a huge impact on your business. I mean, you, you had to really cut costs right? To just, just to stay in business, just to make sure that you could survive because you could only raise prices a certain amount before people would stop buying your product. But in order to stay alive, you had to probably do things like cut back on expenses. I, I gather

2 (11m 37s):
Guy, it was a matter of survival, right? And it was definitely one of the hardest things we had to do. The the cuts to the marketing and the spend were, were easier. The layoffs were a lot harder and we needed to do it because we didn't have control in the near future over the revenue side.

1 (11m 59s):
Yeah. When you You know when you're not profitable and not growing, it's, it's tough. I mean the, the only options are to fundraise right? Or look for acquirers. So You know we look for fundraising, but it wasn't coming. And You know we had to pivot to look for people to people who would be interested in merging us with another business or acquiring the business.

0 (12m 26s):
So I guess around March of 2022, you really started to look at your options sort of with a sort of a more urgent lens, right? So one, one option would be, can we find investors? So you, and did you guys go out and see if you could raise money?

1 (12m 48s):
Yeah, we went to, I wanna say five or six dozen potential investors. Wow. And spoke to them about You know the situation that we were in, that it was a You, know that that cost, that skyrocketed and that we thought it was gonna be a short term thing and that cost would come back down and we end up being more profitable. But it's tough to fundraise when you're not growing and not profitable and yeah, it wasn't a, it wasn't an easy sell.

0 (13m 20s):
Yeah. That must've been hard. That must've really hard to do that to, to really go from place to place and hear no or thank you or, we'll, we'll we'll get back to you

2 (13m 34s):
Guy. It was extremely hard. I remember talking with Vincent and we were discussing whether or not we wanted to approach our friends and like our colleagues about potentially putting in some money. And I told Vincent that I didn't want to go to my friends to do that. Like I felt like the market was telling me something and I, I felt like it would be misleading in my heart to ask them to put in more money when I maybe started to not to not believe.

0 (14m 4s):
Yeah, I bet. And so when that didn't work, one other option is of course, could you sell, could you, could you find a buyer for the company and what, what did you guys try to do?

1 (14m 18s):
Yeah, we collectively got together with a board, had meetings and came out with a list of people that we're gonna go after and who's gonna talk to them. You know brands and or You know organizations that would be interested in acquiring us. But the idea was You know we might not make sense as a standalone entity, but it does make sense as an add-on like, we spent 10 years building this brand that people understand and know and go back and look for. And You know if you already have a group that's operating a business, you can tack this onto it. And You know, we had talked with probably another You know close to a hundred brands. Wow. And a lot of them You know were interested and some of them were worried about supply chain issues and we actually ended up You know getting an offer some offers from, interestingly, these You know m do you remember the, the kind of SPAC craze?

0 (15m 12s):
Oh

1 (15m 12s):
Yes. There was like a whole craze of You know these public companies that would basically in cities that would go public and then look for an acquisition later on. Hmm. And so there were quite a few of these in our space and we talked with them, but in looking closely at those businesses, we were, it just, it didn't feel like a right fit. Yeah. And nothing ended up making it past the finish line.

0 (15m 39s):
And, and you guys, what, what was your objective? I mean, you could have just wound down the business and You know declared bankruptcy. There's lots of things you could have done. I mean, you had raised money. I think you'd raised I think about $10 million, but was your objective to at least try to get some money back to the original investors?

1 (15m 59s):
Yeah, so the You know we had raised a little above 10 million and the goal was You know to try to make them whole or have that equity rollover into another entity. But You know, ultimately You know. So it's very tough to, I think align incentives during mergers and yeah, these types of acquisitions. And so it, nothing really fit the bill.

2 (16m 24s):
I think part of that too is like, we wanted this thing to live on, like somebody else take it and like keep going with what we made. It doesn't have to be huge, but just keep going with it.

1 (16m 35s):
You know we'd spent this 10 years building this, it's named after our mom. It's very personal to us. Yeah. And to see it disappear, I mean, You know it, it felt to me like it would be like almost the lost of a loved one. Like there's a, there was a definite grieving process when it came down to letting something like this go.

0 (16m 56s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back, how a chance encounter at a holiday party, reinvigorated Vincent to get back into the business of well building a business. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This

NetSuite (17m 10s):
Lab. If you're an entrepreneur growing your business, then you've probably experienced times when it took forever to close the books. Maybe you have too many manual processes and the things you used to do in a day are now taking a week. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 36,000, 25, 1 30 6,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25 NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close their books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. And one, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need all in one place. Right now Download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free at NetSuite dot com slash built. That's NetSuite dot com slash built to get your own KPI checklist NetSuite dot com slash built

Bite (18m 32s):
Crossing off your Dream Day checklist. It's time to get your smile wedding ready with bite clear aligners. Start by ordering your at-Home impression kit Today for only 1495 bite clear aligners are doctor directed and delivered to your door. Treatment costs thousands less than braces plus they offer payment plans except eligible insurance. And you can pay with your HSA or FSA walk down the aisle beaming this fall wedding season. Get 80% off your impression kit when you use Code Wondery at by.com. That's BYT e.com. Be confident be you with Bite.

0 (19m 16s):
Hello and welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz and my guests today are the founders of the Asian inspired snack food brand. Dang Foods. So I guess you guys did decide in the summer of 2022 to do the wind down option. Right? Which, what did that mean? What did that mean you were gonna do Andrew?

2 (19m 38s):
What we decided to do is with the board's permission, we stopped ordering inventory because we didn't see a path forward and that the supply chain at that time was not being alleviated. So we decided that we were gonna sell off our assets and have this time to try to sell the company while we sell off the inventory for nine months and ultimately return the money, whatever cash is left to the creditors.

0 (20m 5s):
And how much inventory did you guys have at that time? In the US

2 (20m 9s):
We had, the thing about that Vincent didn't mention is not only were the freight rates up, but the average time in port also spiked during that time from 50 days to a hundred days or seven weeks to 14 weeks.

0 (20m 27s):
Wow. Just 'cause there wasn't enough manpower to move it out quickly.

2 (20m 32s):
Yes. So it flowed and flowed, but in parts of 2021 we were really, really short. And then because we had to over order it towards the end of that we started getting a huge surplus. Right. So by, by the beginning of 2022, we had like nine months and we had a bunch of cash sitting in coconut chips and rice chips at our warehouse.

0 (20m 58s):
I cannot imagine how difficult this time was. I'm sure it's still even raw now talking about it and You know in late 2023. But how were you guys coping with with it You know, just personally, em emotionally You know, having to, for a variety of reasons, mainly because of the circumstances of the Global pandemic having to wind down this, this brand and business that you'd worked on for over 10 years at that point.

1 (21m 28s):
Yeah. I felt like I lost purpose. I felt like I lost a loved one. I felt like I let my team down. I remember going to the park and crying. And then I, I also remember telling when I have to tell the team this, like just breaking down, like I couldn't hold it together and just crying as well. So for me there were a lot of feelings of loss and grief. Yeah. As if it were You know, a part of my family.

0 (21m 57s):
Andrew How about for you

2 (21m 60s):
Guy? I think this is why my brother and I were such a good team is 'cause we're so different. I felt a huge sense of relief. Huge. And one of the reasons why is because I felt like in the, the months leading up to the decision, including even on your show last time we were there, we had to wear somewhat of a mask in front of the public, in front of employees, in front of creditors, our friends and family. And in making this decision, I felt like we could start to take that mask off.

0 (22m 43s):
Yeah. And that you could start to move to the next chapter in your life. Maybe. I I'm wondering Vincent back to you. CII You know I I'm feeling that sadness for sure and I, I really empathize with that and I I wonder how you, what helped you just emotionally cope, cope with it? How, what was helpful during that time?

1 (23m 15s):
It was about, I'd say a three month depression or depressed period. And I sought out a therapist during that time just to talk through these issues. I, I had a support group of other entrepreneurs and You know they were able to lend some perspective on loaves that they had went through as well. But I also leaned on Andrew. I mean Andrew was my rock during that time. And he really helped You know, keep, keep things together and keep a really positive perspective. You know. He kept reminding me that like, Hey, this is just chapter one, You know, we learned so much from this and we're just gonna put our learnings to work to us in the next chapter. And You know, hearing things like that would, would keep me motivated.

0 (23m 58s):
Yeah.

2 (23m 59s):
I've been going to therapy for like 10 years and it's like I've had much more time to process my feelings along the way I think than Vincent did. And that's why I think that's why emotionally I think I was more ready. Hmm. And I'm, I I wasn't as swayed and maybe I should have been. Maybe that's more human of Vincent. Like maybe I should have been like that. Maybe there's something missing. But I know I did emotionally feel prepared.

0 (24m 27s):
I guess in the midst of this Vincent you had heard of an opportunity and it was with a, a small brand that, that was working on or, or making and selling direct to consumer frozen soup dumplings, Chinese soup dumplings. And you connected with them and, and basically started working with them.

1 (24m 52s):
Yeah, so I sometimes get investment opportunities sent to me and I usually don't, don't pay them much mind. But one really caught my eye, which was there's a restaurant in Seattle that had to shut down during Covid and they lost almost all their revenue and they pivoted to shipping frozen soup dumplings locally. And when Word got out, You know they got demand from other cities and started expanding to other cities. At the time it was XEJ and now it's, it's

0 (25m 20s):
Mila. The name of the company is Mila.

1 (25m 22s):
Mila, yeah. And when I studied abroad in Shanghai in college, You know I had soup dumplings there and when I tried these I thought they tasted authentic like exactly like I had in China. Yeah. And You know it, it was a, a unique product because You know it was, it came frozen raw and you had to steam it at home. But the result is a restaurant quality dumpling. And I was just, I was just, I had to get involved. So I actually wrote a check in, invested in the company back in 2021. And then towards the middle of 2022 I got an update from the founders that, Hey You know we're doing really well.

1 (26m 4s):
We grew 500% and we're next. We're looking at going into retail. And so I connected with them about the retail piece 'cause I've been doing that for the last You know 10 years. And I I joined them at the end of 2022.

0 (26m 19s):
Wow. And up until the, the end of 2022, the idea was you would wind down the brand and sell the assets and then You know return as much as you could to the creditors. And that would be it. That would be the end of Dang. That was basically where you guys were headed.

2 (26m 39s):
Yes. From a very, from a paper perspective that made sense to sell like the, what you're describing makes sense and Vincent and I also just wanted the brand to live on. So we say assets, but we were really selling the brand and everything so that that could live on with somebody else. So

0 (27m 0s):
You were looking for somebody to take on the, the brand name. Yes. And maybe they could continue it, but, but so far up, up until You know that time you had no luck. You know you could not find anybody. Correct. But I guess eventually you did Vincent you met somebody at a party who just happened to be, tell me the story.

1 (27m 21s):
Yeah, so I went to a holiday party in December, 2022 and it was an eighties theme party. And so I was wearing an Adidas track suit with You know a boombox in the style of run DMC. And I saw someone else who had a similar outfit also wearing an Adidas tracksuit. And so we started talking, we got around to, hey, what do we do? And I told him about Dang and You know, I told him, oh, You know, we're we're winding it down. And he said, don't wind it down like it's a great brand. You know, maybe we'll buy it. And he, he happened to be the founder of Safe Catch, which imports seafood from Thailand. And so the more we started talking, we're like, okay, this could work.

1 (28m 3s):
He already imports products from Thailand. He has a team over there. He knows our brand, he knows our customers. You know, let's, let's flesh this out.

0 (28m 11s):
So, so this, this, this company essentially that you, this guy that you met at a, at the party who's had a whole operation in Thailand, he took over the brand. He's, he's now taken over the brand and the label. How, how are you able to, to work all that out?

1 (28m 27s):
It ended up working out where he took over the operations, he bought the assets and he's able to keep the brand going. So I worked with him on retaining as much customer distribution as possible. So I had to call up whole Foods and let him know what was happening and let him know, Hey, there's gonna be a gap in inventory, but we'll be back. And luckily they were very, very cooperative and very, very You know, generous about, about holding our space.

0 (28m 53s):
And so Dang is still operating as the same, more or less the same brand with the same products just now owned by somebody else.

1 (29m 2s):
We're still on shelves at Whole Foods, we're still at Amazon. You know, they, we, we have calls with them and advise them on customers and new products and You know even hires and yeah, they're, they're continuing to operate it. So I'm glad that You know our, our product at least is still available for those people that, that really love it. And I'm really proud that You know we're still still around. Yeah.

2 (29m 28s):
And, and our baby faces and our signatures are still on the back of the packaging. And Vinny, we should, you and I should have a discussion afterwards about the legality of that, but we could talk about that later.

0 (29m 42s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back more on the future of Dang Foods and what's next for Andrew and Vincent. Stay with us. You're listening to How I Built This Lab.

ButcherBox (29m 60s):
The main course for Thanksgiving dinner can sometimes be a main source of stress, not anymore. With ButcherBox, you can get humanely sourced meat and sustainably sourced seafood right to your door. You can customize your box and it always ships free. Plus, when you sign up as a member, you'll get access to exclusive deals, delicious recipe ideas, and first dibs on their newest cuts and products. And this year the holidays are easier than ever because ButcherBox is offering our listeners a free Turkey plus $20 off their first order. Sign up today@butcherbox.com slash Wondery and use code Wondery to get $20 off your first order. That's butcherbox.com/ Wondery and use code Wondery to claim this deal.

Georgetown University (30m 41s):
Georgetown University's customizable executive MBA delivers community and convenience. It's a customizable program based on your interests and career goals with a wide variety of electives. The program's hybrid format with in-person classes held on campus, one weekend per month balances flexibility with the support of our collaborative community. The vibrant DC campus gives you unrivaled access to policymakers and global leaders across industries. With a renowned faculty and worldwide alumni network, you'll graduate prepared to take charge on the global stage wherever your career takes you ready to leave a legacy that impacts not only the business world, but also creates positive change within society. Earn Georgetown's executive MBA explore the program at msb.georgetown.edu/emb dash Wondery.

0 (31m 35s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. Here's more of my conversation with Vincent and Andrew Kitirattragarn of Dang Foods. It's interesting. Andrew, I'm obviously Vincent is now fully in, in You know two feet in with Mila trying to turn that into a, a bigger brand. And Andrew, I, from what I gather, you are doing some consulting work, helping You know, particularly helping other startups that need to wind down their businesses for a variety of reasons. Kind of helping walk them through that process.

2 (32m 8s):
Yeah, it's, it's interesting because when Vinny asked me to join Dang, I didn't have any food and beverage CPG experience. I just did it 'cause it was a cool opportunity. I'm trying to help my brother and it'll be, it would've, it was gonna be cool to do something together. Yeah. Like it could have been any industry that did better for the world. It could have been any industry. So I, I did a lot of thinking when I was there in my final years of Dang. I was like, oh, like I don't know if this is my industry. This is where my passion is. I'm just helping out my brother 'cause he needs the help and this is fun. And something happened the day in April that we made that decision to wind down and it was a really tough day for Vincent.

2 (32m 59s):
And it was a tough day when we had to tell the employees what was going on and when, when I had to call the creditors. That was all tough. But I did feel all of a sudden rejuvenated and really engaged because I really wanted to tell people what was going on. And I really wanted to let 'em know what our plan was and ideally give our employees some severance or give them a little package to stay with us or tell the investors who we hadn't been keeping in the loop what was going on. Let the creditors know that it's a tough situation that they might not get their money back, but we're trying everything we can and hopefully in nine months we'll be able to give them back something.

0 (33m 41s):
Yeah.

2 (33m 42s):
I really liked being on the hotspot and doing it and I dunno if it's a passion, but it's something that's engaging during this process

0 (33m 53s):
And, and basically, I mean, you can take your experience and Right. And help help people kind of navigate it. 'cause it, I'm sure it's for many people it's traumatic.

2 (34m 5s):
It's traumatic, yeah. And it's, it, it's traumatic. And I, I mean I was, there's a couple things that come to mind here, Vinny. I remember when we were having a hard time in 20 21, 20 22, I was like, Vinny, if we call this the Dang Foods company, it's gonna be harder for us to make these dec decisions, especially as a fiduciary to the board. So I wanna call this the a, b, C company when things are going hard. I don't wanna call this the Dang Foods company, which was named after our mother. Hmm. And I think, I think others need help with that guidance. And remember Vincent was the one to really create this.

2 (34m 46s):
He was the real creator in this. And I came in to help scale it. And so what I learned from this, and what I want to tell other people too is that I Dang Foods company, the entity failed. We are not failures.

0 (35m 3s):
No question about it. I mean, I mean here, here's the thing, right? Like How I Built This as a show about brands and how they were built, and obviously it's a show about successful brands, but failure is, I mean, it's a tricky word, right? Because it, it feels deflating, but, but it can also be immensely valuable, incredibly valuable as a tool to help you prepare for the next journey. Right? And, and so Vincent, I mean, I I can't imagine how much you learned. What, tell me, can you talk about some of of the things that you're, that you've brought with you to your new company that I don't know. Let's start with the things that you did, right.

0 (35m 45s):
What are some of the things you did right at Dang that worked and that you will continue to do?

1 (35m 49s):
I would say You know, focusing on the product at the very beginning is, is the utmost importance. So making sure that you really understand your product and why people are buying it and who's buying it and when are they consuming it. And this is all kind of goes under this guise of product market fit. I think that's super important and I think that's something that You know founders need to be obsessive about at the beginning because your success is ultimately gonna depend on how much product market fit you have. So I would say that's the number one thing. And then You know, I think making sure that as a company, you're, you're set up for that success.

1 (36m 37s):
So You know now after 10 years, we understand that it's not just having a good product, but you actually have the operations team. You gotta have a finance team, you gotta have marketing team to really back it up. And so if you You know, have one part that's working, but one part that isn't, it's not really gonna add up.

0 (36m 55s):
And, and so how about you Andrew? What are some of the things that you, you, you guys did well at Dang that you You know you, you'll continue to kind of use You know in your, in your sort of professional career?

2 (37m 9s):
There's a concept that we labeled disagree and commit. So I felt like Vince and I were pretty aligned for most things. And there were certain things where we weren't aligned and I think we fought pretty hard. One of them being the energy bars, the Dang bars that we launched in 2019. And ultimately it came time to make the decision and Vincent was like, all right, I'm gonna do this. We're gonna do this and this is why, and I know you're concerned, but just like, trust me and I did that.

2 (37m 50s):
And so the disagree and commit the disagreement happens behind closed doors. And then, and then we come out on the other side, we're aligned publicly and we move on. And you keep going like that with your partner. That's something I will take to the future.

0 (38m 7s):
And and what about things that you didn't quite do right that now reflecting on it, you, you wouldn't do that again?

2 (38m 16s):
I'd say spending too much on marketing or on demos too early when you're really focused should be focused on product market fit and that you have a really cool good core line in understanding what the consumers need and want and continuing to tinker without, before spending that much money on marketing. I think that's, that's a big lesson specifically for CPG.

0 (38m 40s):
And, and and did you do, I mean, is that something that you guys probably spent too much on or Initially

1 (38m 47s):
I think at the beginning we did things like go to consumer shows. So there are these shows like Green Festival and Fit Expo, women's Expo that were meant to hit at a specific consumer. And we tried a lot of them without actually trying to pinpoint who the consumer was before that, I think we saw it as a way to spread You know word about the brand, but You know, looking back at like, there were just too many different shows, too many different types of people, we should be more precise about who we're targeting. And then we ended up having to redesign our packaging multiple times because You know, I think we were probably swayed at the time, we had just raised some money.

1 (39m 27s):
And so our investors had a perspective on You know what they thought we were, but rather than dig down and say, okay, we are an Asian American snack company, You know, we, we kind of went in the direction of oh we're, we're a healthy snack company. We're, we're a national food company, which to us wasn't differentiated when you really like picked it apart. You know there's a lot of healthy snack companies. But what was unique to us is the fact that we're using You know an authentic recipe from Thai cuisine. And so leaning into that later on was, it felt better and it felt more authentic to who we were.

2 (40m 4s):
I will say that our family, our specifically our father lent some money into the company and it was not an immaterial amount and he did get a payout with the creditors 'cause he was a part of that class equal to everyone else. But he was not made whole. And I for a long time felt a lot of shame about that. And Vincent, I think You know we called him and I remember him saying like, it's cool, I I still love you guys and like I'm I'm happy to have helped you have this experience with each other.

0 (40m 47s):
Yeah. I mean I think both of you guys are parents, right?

1 (40m 50s):
I

2 (40m 50s):
Am. Yes.

0 (40m 51s):
Yes. And so imagine if your child asked you for some help to start their business and it didn't work out like you, you'd still be super proud of them, right? Like just think about your own kid.

1 (41m 2s):
Yeah, I think You know the fact that he, I think he saw a lot of himself in what we were doing too. So he moved to the US in 1977 and started a candle business and he was importing candles from Thailand there. My, him and my mom also had a so flower business. So You know we were, we actually grew up in those businesses and going to the trade shows. And so we learned a lot of the, the skills and the lingo from, from growing up around that. And the fact that we were doing a similar business model but with coconut chips and rice chips, You know, I think he saw that hey, he had influenced us and he was probably proud that he was able to influence us You know enough to start a business and have it run for 10 years.

0 (41m 47s):
You know, obviously Vincent, you're involved in this new company and Andrew you are doing consulting work. Do either of you imagine with all that you've learned from Dang maybe starting something either together or separately starting something new again one day a a new business,

1 (42m 6s):
I could definitely see doing something. I don't think it would be the, in the exact same consumer product industry niche. So what I mean is that You know there's a lot of challenges with coming up with a consumer product. You know, bringing it to market, dealing with distribution and retailers. It, it's all the chips are stacked against you as a smaller player. And You know, I I don't think that it's, it's just not a, it's not a game that I want to play again necessarily. However, I think if you can find a niche or maybe a technological advantage or be a part of the ecosystem in a different way, like You know creating, I say say it's like AI for flavor innovation, something like that.

1 (42m 54s):
Then I think that's super interesting because I can You know, use what I've learned about this industry to, to my advantage and come at it with a different angle.

0 (43m 4s):
But I mean, as you guys say, I mean the brand persists and in 10, 15, 20 years time, even when you're far, far removed from it, I mean Dang, Foods, Dang products might be thriving.

1 (43m 18s):
Yeah, I hope it's around until I'm no longer around You know. It's, it's nice to be able to walk around whole Foods with my three-year-old and pick up a bag and You know, I think the baby picture on the back of being Andrew, I was about three years old and Andrew's about one. And so when my daughter sees that picture, she, she says, oh, that's me. 'cause I look just like her. So it's pretty cool to be able to walk around and show her that

2 (43m 46s):
You know it's cool to definitely see ourselves or, or, or or what we've, what we, what Vincent specifically created on shelf at whole Foods and it's still there. It might be there for the next 10 years, might grow. Another thing that I'm very proud of, there's a of other Asian inspired brands. Now, the names that I think of are Fly by Jing Sanzo Osom that I believe are following what we've done. And they're doing it with arguably a lot of anti authenticity in spreading Asian flavors, Asian culture from day one.

2 (44m 30s):
And I'm really proud to see them doing really well in this space. And hopefully it leads to more Asian entrepreneurs in the future taking a leap of faith.

0 (44m 43s):
Andrew Vincent, thank you so much. Thank

2 (44m 46s):
You guy. Thank you. I I also wanna say like I, us being able to be on your show is like one of the pinnacles of our time at Dang.

0 (44m 56s):
Well thanks. That's so, that's so nice to hear.

2 (44m 58s):
Like there's others that are like, oh, I think about the exit or I think about this, but yours is definitely up there. If it's not like the number one thing that we look back on this experience and we have like a freaking codified recording of like the highs and lows of all of it. And like what better honor to like share that with like millions of people and for us to like have this with us for life. So I just, I, I personally want to thank you.

0 (45m 24s):
That's Vincent and Andrew Kitirattragarn co-founders of Dang Foods. Hey, thanks so much for listening to How I Built This Lab this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's free. This episode was produced by Carla Estevez, with editing by John Isabella. Our music was composed by Rum Arablouei. Our audio engineer was Neal Rauch. Our production team at How I Built This includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Chris Masini, JC Howard, Kerry Thompson, Malia Aguello, and Sam Paulson. Neva Grant is our supervising editor. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Lab.

Wondery (46m 13s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Amazon Music (46m 32s):
Today. HIBT hop dominates pop culture, but it wasn't always like that. And to tell the story of how that changed, I want to take you back to a very special year in rap 88. It was too much good music, the world was on fire. Fire, yeah, I'm Will Smith. This is Class of 88, my new podcast about the moments albums and artists that inspired a sonic revolution and secured 1988 as one of HIBT hop's most important years. We'll talk to the people who were there. And most of all, we'll bring you some amazing stories. You know what my biggest memory from that tour is. It was your birthday. Yes. And you brought me the shot life size artwork cutout. This is Class of 88, the story of a year that changed HIBT Hop. Listen To Class of 88. Wherever you get your podcast, you can binge the entire series Right now on the Amazon Music app or Audible.