1 (1s):
This is my voice. It can tell you a lot about me and I'm not changing it for anyone in NPRs, Black, Stories, Black Truths, you'll find a collection of NPR episodes centered on the black experience search NPR r Black Stories Black Truths. wherever you get podcasts,

2 (23s):
Running a new business can be stressful. And the last thing you need is to worry about unexpected accidents or lawsuits. So if you're an entrepreneur or startup owner, don't overlook the importance of liability insurance. It's a critical investment in the success and longevity of your business. Protect yourself, your assets and your reputation by securing the liability coverage for your specific needs. With a customized liability insurance policy, you can face challenges with confidence knowing that you have a safety net in place. Take the first step in safeguarding your business today. Go to zen insurance.com/save 35 for a free business insurance quote.

2 (1m 7s):
Get the low cost insurance protection you need from Canada's small business insurance experts.

0 (1m 15s):
Amazon five star reviews presents better than a wooden steak. Today's customer review is from a customer that goes by burnt toast. They write. Ever since this three pack of organic garlic was delivered, I have not seen a single vampire that cannot be a coincidence. Will abate my review of anything changes. Five stars. Well burnt toast. If it doesn't work, at least you got the beginnings of a nice marinara. That's how to make every day better. Real Amazon customers. Real reviews really

3 (1m 44s):
Working out is tough. And finding a workout program that sticks even tougher. In fact, recently I really fell out of my workout routine and the thing that brought me back was my Peloton. And this is for several reasons. For one, pelotons classes are designed to fit in your life. You have even five minutes you can get a workout in. They, they have it all the way up to 20 minutes and everything in between. You can find one that works for you. You can strength train, run, walk, row, or just choose from another one of the 12 plus disciplines and 85 plus class types. And the other reason that I love Peloton and why it brought me back into working out was because Pelotons classes don't feel like a regular workout class.

3 (2m 25s):
They feel like entertainment. They're fun, they're exhilarating. They make me laugh out loud. I'm looking at you Bradley Rose. And you know what? You probably know Peloton as the people who make bikes, but they also make the Peloton tread, the Peloton rower, and even the Peloton app, which you can now get for free. It's got classes like yoga, strength training, hit cardio and boxing. and you can do it whenever and wherever perfect for the summer months. You can bring it right with you. If this all sounds like it's gotta be beyond your price point, remember the app is free. Not to mention it's the best value in fitness because people actually stick with the workouts once they try them. I am perfect proof of that. Ready to give it a try.

3 (3m 5s):
Get started and download the free Peloton app today. Peloton app available through free tier or paid subscription. Paid membership start at 1699 per month.

2 (3m 16s):
Hello and Welcome to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So there's enough material in the clothes we throw away to keep making more clothes for decades. The fashion industry alone dumps 92 million tons of textile waste a year, and all of that cotton and polyester is recyclable. It can all be used to make brand new clothing. This phenomenon struck Peter Majeranowski as a problem looking for a solution. Peter founded a company called Circ. It's developed patented technology that can recycle polycon, which is what the majority of our clothes are made from. And he's already partnering with some of the biggest names in apparel to try and reduce all of that waste.

2 (4m 1s):
Peter actually started out his career in the Navy back in 1998 where he served on ships. In the wake of the nine 11 attacks,

4 (4m 10s):
I was on board a cruiser on its way into the Arabian Gulf, quite a time to be in the service. We immediately suspected it was Osama Bin Laden and we were, instead of continuing on into the Arabian Gulf, we stayed right where we were off the coast of Pakistan and participated in the response So. I had really first row, front row seats to the conflict.

2 (4m 35s):
Oh wow. And then of course it would go on into Iraq and the after Afghanistan, Iraq and So. what, tell me a little bit about some of the things that you did. Were you, you were also deployed for the Iraq war also on ship or, or on land?

4 (4m 54s):
On land actually. And the first person I met when I entered Iraq was at that time, general Petraeus. And he said, what is the sailor doing in the middle of the desert? And as the Iraq war was, was getting underway, they really needed support in terms of analysis on the private sector that existed and how that could be utilized in the posts that on Iraq to help reconstruct the country. And So I was writing a lot of white papers in the Pentagon and then I was tapped to actually go over to Iraq and support various missions. Hmm.

2 (5m 31s):
So you, when did you wrap up your, your naval career?

4 (5m 35s):
I wrapped up active duty in 2004.

2 (5m 37s):
So 2004. and you went, I guess you went on to work for like, from whatever, a defense industry management firm. But is it, was it like an investment firm or,

4 (5m 49s):
Yes, it was a small group investing in mainly new NATO countries that were soon to join the eu. So these would be countries like Romania or Bulgaria where it was still very emerging markets with a lot of opportunity and I was excited to go there. My, my Pentagon boss was a civilian, had a lot of experience in those markets. And so we went there to invest US dollars into these emerging opportunities. And for me, I already got a bug for, for business and how enterprise can move economies and move, move countries and I was very interested in that.

4 (6m 32s):
And so for, for me, Eastern Europe was a great place to, to cut my teeth and really take on a lot of tasks.

2 (6m 39s):
Alright. So you, you decide in 2009 to go back to school, get an M B A and, and was, tell me what your, your thinking was that, that you would get an M B A and maybe start a business?

4 (6m 52s):
Yeah, you know, what we were doing already in Eastern Europe was pretty entrepreneurial, but I felt that I could use more sophisticated tools and just be better. and I wanted to expand my network. And so it felt like a logical next step for me. Yeah.

2 (7m 9s):
So you, so you start that program, you get your M B A and I guess sometime after that you, you would meet this guy Hillary Kurowski, who was a, a very famous immunologist. He was involved in a polio vaccine and, and, and he was, I guess he was running a biotech foundation or he was running a, a, a company, a lab. And he talked to you about an idea he had. Can you tell me about, about that meeting and what came outta that?

4 (7m 41s):
Yeah, Hillary actually is a old family friend. My, my father went to medical school with Hillary in, in Warsaw until the, the war broke out and my father had to escape and they reconnected after the war.

2 (7m 54s):
This is World War ii, you're talking about

4 (7m 56s):
World War ii. Yeah. And So I was just visiting him, having dinner at his house, and he was talking to me about his foundation and the research they were doing in, in plant sciences specifically, his vision was to use plants as a vehicle for, for vaccines to develop vaccines, grow vaccines. And he was really frustrated with the uptake from the F d A and other sources. So he started applying that know-how to look at industrial applications. And over dinner, he told me that he just had a patent granted and a lot of press around an engineered non-smoking tobacco plant that could be used for biofuels.

2 (8m 35s):
Wow, okay. So, so Hillary had this idea to use tobacco plants to make biofuel and even got a patent for that technology. And, and presumably that idea really grabbed your attention because because of your time you spent working on fuel tankers in the Navy. Is that, is that right?

4 (8m 50s):
Yeah, one of my first jobs in the Navy, I was boarding ships, smuggling oil out of Iraq against un sanctions, and we'd usually have to sit on those ships after we, we intercepted them for 18 hours at a time. So I had a lot of time to think about the geopolitical nature of energy and oil. And, and that really ignited a, a passion inside of me to, to look at alternative fuels and how amazing it would be if you could democratize energy, take these large poker chips away from bad actors around the world. I mean, we're still seeing this today in Europe right. With the war in Ukraine. And so when he mentioned that to me, and it happened to be during this global recession where I was not active anymore, I thought this is something I could really dig my teeth into.

4 (9m 33s):
And so the next thing we know we're, we're starting what's now Circ, but at that time was called Titan Biosciences.

2 (9m 40s):
And and this was to turn tobacco into a fuel source like, like biofuels for airplanes?

4 (9m 47s):
Exactly. Or maybe maybe more like cars and trucks. Okay. We were specifically targeting ethanol and biodiesel and doing it with a crop that is not, is not a food crop and can grow almost anywhere in the world.

2 (10m 1s):
And, and Right. 'cause obviously bio biofuels are made, generally made from corn. Right, right. And so yeah, tobacco, I mean it's, it's odd, but what, what is it about tobacco that makes it a good, a good source for this fuel?

4 (10m 17s):
Yeah. This is not a typical tobacco plant. They grow really large. We, we treated them differently. We grew more per acre and we would, what was was good about it is that tobacco grows in over a hundred countries around the world and we could get good yields per acre.

2 (10m 34s):
Yeah, I mean, and, and let's just talk about the process for a moment. I mean, it was a, a, a hydrothermal process. So can you kind of explain how, how that worked? Like you would chop up, you would basically process dried leaves or I don't know, you took the tobacco plant. Did, did you dry it like they do for cigars or

4 (10m 52s):
Yeah, no, no, nothing like that. Okay. We, we, we would harvest it fresh. Yeah. We were using combines to do it, chop it up the juices when you harvest it were, we would press out because those already had high amounts of sugar that we could extract for fermenting into ethanol. Yep. And the remaining biomass, we put through this hydrothermal process where we could use water to act like molecular scissors, basically to cut down the cellulose into glucose and extract the oil.

2 (11m 22s):
So you're basically mechanically doing what, what nature naturally does. Like the, the, the oil we use today are plants we're plants millions of years ago. Right. Animals and plants. And, and so you're essentially doing that, but in a much more expedited way, applying pressure to create a fuel Exactly.

4 (11m 40s):
Yeah. Where, where it's like time machine for nature. Hmm.

2 (11m 44s):
So a cool idea. and you had been in, in, in, you know, in the Navy, so you knew that there was a lot of interest in biofuels, but what, what was the challenge you had? I mean, you, you know, I I I I've read that you had a hard time raising money, but, but why, what was the, you know, 'cause you started this in 2012, but why, what, why couldn't you attract any, any investors?

4 (12m 7s):
What I can now see in retrospect is there are so many compounding risk factors. You had to find farmers willing to grow it. You had to deal with a plant that didn't have any other application. And also the timing was, was pretty bad. There was a lot of big failures in biofuels in general. And so a lot of the investment community, the venture funds said, look, we, we can't, our hands are tied even if we wanted to, we're not permitted to invest anymore in biofuels. And so it was a scary time. We, we could see, as I say, the end of the earth, our, our runway getting smaller and smaller and we had to quickly scramble to find new applications. But you had

2 (12m 46s):
This process that you, that you were working on. I mean, and, and so by the way, how are you financing the process with no investment capital?

4 (12m 54s):
We, we were creative. I joke we make one plus one equal five all the time. But we did have some investment from, from individuals high net worth individuals. And we had millions of dollars of grants from the Virginia Tobacco Commission, for example. So that allowed us to develop this technology, which is now the bedrock of Circ. Right.

2 (13m 17s):
From what I understand, you were essentially turning the pulp from tobacco stocks to paper.

4 (13m 21s):
Yeah, that was one of the iterations. Great, great research there. Yeah. We, we were looking at just continuing with tobacco. And so we looked at how to apply that hydrothermal know-how to make nont tree pulp for packaging paper, you name it. And it turns out the highest or one of the highest qualities of pulp or cellulose goes into clothing, about 300 million trees a year. And that's when a Swedish trading company, they traded primarily in paper and pulp, but they also had a recycling business. And they were the ones that suggested we try running some old t-shirts through our process to see if we could recover anything. And it worked.

2 (14m 3s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back, Peter changes course transforming his biofuel company into one that recycles textiles. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This Lab.

5 (14m 20s):
Hey,

2 (14m 20s):
It's guy here. And while we take a little break, I wanted to let you know about an episode of How I. Built This we released a couple of weeks ago. It's about how Sal Khan, the creator of Khan Academy, is using AI to make education more accessible. We've all heard about the rise of generative AI technology and the popularity of things like chat G p t. Well, at Khan Academy, Sal Khan is working on ways to build this technology into a new tool to help students learn more effectively by providing a personal learning experience. Of course, like all technology, this has its risks, but Sal believes that generative AI could reshape the classroom for good and help us close the massive learning gap left by the pandemic by supporting students and teachers alike.

2 (15m 4s):
You can find this episode by following How I Built This. And scrolling back a little bit to the episode titled, when AI is your Personal tutor with Sal Khan of Khan Academy, or by searching Khan Academy. That's K h a n Academy, wherever you listen to podcasts. Hey, welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz and my guest today is Peter Majeranowski, who back in 2016, discovered a way to break down and reuse cotton and polyester. So, okay, so you, you, you start experimenting with this and you see that it's successful, you can actually take a a shirt and you can, you can actually shred it up.

2 (15m 52s):
And, and, and what I mean, didn't just want like a, a a bag stuffed with like shredded cotton. What did you give them? What did you deliver to them?

4 (15m 60s):
We gave them a high purity cellulose or a high purity pulp that could go at the very beginning of the supply chain to make fibers like visco rayon or cel. So we had two streams coming out of our process. We had the, the, the high purity cellulose or pulp, but we also had the building blocks of polyester, which traditionally come from oil and gas industry.

2 (16m 23s):
Alright. So once you, this happened, I mean, did, was it clear at that point that you were gonna pivot away from biofuels and tobacco?

4 (16m 33s):
Not quite. We were trying a bunch of things. We were throwing basically spaghetti against the wall to see what would stick so we could continue on as a company. And when we figured out the, the textile recycling, we didn't honestly think it was solving a big problem. We didn't know at the time. And then we started immediately researching thanks to, to Google and other resources and saw that it, it was a really big problem.

2 (16m 57s):
This was a huge, a huge problem because obviously the fashion industry accounts for a significant percentage of carbon emissions and pollution. Wa you know, in, in rivers and, and oceans. I think up to 20% of the world's wastewater comes from, you know, the fashion industry. And then yeah, just a, a small percentage of clothing is recycled. So you were being contacted by manufacturers who are like, how do we get, how do we use more recycled materials in our clothing

4 (17m 30s):
By manufacturers but also brands? Hmm. One of our first cold calls was from Patagonia and they have a takeback program where you can come that in with a Patagonia garment that's used. It doesn't matter how old that they'll give you some value for it and then they try to resell it or they'll even try to repair it to resell it. But if they can't repair it and resell it, they've been warehousing it. And so they had this big problem of warehouses full of, of end of use clothing that needed to be recycled. And so that was what drove that phone call.

2 (18m 3s):
Yeah. So, okay, so you were contacted by Patagonia first and then eventually others. And they wanted to know, can you do this at scale? So I have to imagine to do it at scale. You had to raise to really raise serious money to make that happen.

4 (18m 20s):
Serious, serious money. Yeah. A lot of people wanted to know when, when they could start sending truckloads over, when they could start buying recycled material and, and we're still on that path. Yeah. It, it is very capital intensive. We're talking about significant chemical engineering processes.

2 (18m 37s):
So let's talk about how this works. Just a, a small percentage of clothing is recycled less than

4 (18m 45s):
1%,

2 (18m 46s):
Less than 1% globally. The idea is, let's figure out how we can get more stuff to you guys so you can recycle it or help us recycle it. Let's talk about your process first. I think most of the t-shirts come in or the articles of clothing that come in are poly cotton. So they're like a, a combination of cotton and polyester, right? That's right. Okay. And then you essentially are doing what with that article of clothing?

4 (19m 12s):
So we shred it, put it through our process that strips out the dyes and other finishing chemistry. And what we're left is with a very high purity cotton cellulose and those polyester building blocks that can be used for making new clothing.

2 (19m 28s):
So you can take a t-shirt, a poly cotton shirt, put it through your processes, hydrothermal reaction. It's basically pressure, water heat. But then how do you separate the cotton from the polyester in that shirt there? It's all intertwined. That's

4 (19m 42s):
Right. That's the beauty of it. When you reverse the reaction of making polyester, you're breaking it down to its original building blocks and those building blocks dissolve into water. So essentially you're dissolving away the polyester and also separating it away from the cotton. So now you have a solid stream with the cotton and a liquid stream with the polyester building blocks.

2 (20m 3s):
Wow. Alright. So you, you, you basically can take a poly cotton T-shirt and basically essentially melt away the plastic, the polyester you're left with, with white cotton. 'cause you've removed the dyes and it gets shredded up. And then that can essentially be turned into thread to make new t-shirts.

4 (20m 24s):
Exactly.

2 (20m 26s):
How many cycles can a a piece of clothing go through before you can't recycle it any, any longer?

4 (20m 33s):
Yeah, so whenever you have a, a chemical engineering process, you always have a little bit of loss from just material handling and things like that. But the polyester can get re polymerized and un polymerized, you know, back and forth essentially infinitely.

2 (20m 48s):
I remember when, when my, my children were babies, we decided to use cotton diapers for them because I, I just hated the idea of throwing away diapers and just seeing piles of just, you know, diapers in a landfill. Yeah. So we got, I had a service, they'd pick up cotton diapers every week and then bring back fresh cotton diapers. It was great, but still it was, it's water intensive. It requires a lot of bleach. Right. And the service was, was doing that. I have to imagine this process still requires a lot of water.

4 (21m 19s):
It does, but we recycle over 90% of it back into the beginning of the process. Hmm.

2 (21m 24s):
H how do you do that?

4 (21m 26s):
A lot of chemical engineering, a lot of water treatment. We're doing filtration steps to remove the dyes and other finishing chemistry so that we can then use that water again. Huh.

2 (21m 40s):
Alright. So essentially there is, I I think I'm, I'm I'm right in saying this, there is more than enough clothing in the world to continue to recycle it, to continue to make new clothing. Is that right? That the premise is today? There, there, there are enough pieces of clothing that are not recycled that if they were recycled we could just use that we wouldn't have to make, we wouldn't have to get virgin cotton or, or virgin plastic.

4 (22m 7s):
Absolutely. We believe we have all the clothes we need to make all the clothes we'll ever need. And when you look at the, the scale of this industry, it's massive and a lot of it ends up in landfill within a year or two. And so there's a lot of material there that is in a linear system that really should be recirculated. So we can continue to use those resources.

2 (22m 29s):
We're gonna take another quick break, but when we come back, how Peter turned poly cotton recycling into a growing business and his thoughts on fashion's looming reckoning with sustainability. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This lab.

5 (22m 60s):
Welcome

2 (23m 0s):
Back to How I Built This lab. I'm Guy Raz. My guest today is Peter Majeranowski, co-founder and c e o of Circ. Okay. So now you've got the technology down and you've got brands. I believe Zara for example, is already, you know, working with you and has already already has a, a few articles of clothing that have been made from recycled material. Tell me a little bit about how you source all of the clothing, because as you say, only 1% of clothing in the world is recycled. So is it, you know, when you go into a Zara or an h and m I think a lot of 'em have like bins where you can, you can just drop things off, but that's still just a fraction of it.

2 (23m 45s):
Where are you getting, where are you getting the stuff from?

4 (23m 48s):
A combination of sources and unfortunately for the planet, but fortunately for business, there's no lack of input material. We get a lot of material from cut and sew factories to make a shirt. It takes about another shirt worth of waste along that whole supply chain to, to produce it. And most of it's that, that final step when you're cutting patterns,

2 (24m 11s):
Discarding just discarding the, the, the textiles from what you're not using the t-shirt

4 (24m 16s):
Exactly. About 15% hits the factory floor. And so that's a, a very good source for, for waste as other solutions are scaling in terms of how do we collect from households sort and get those to, to providers or recyclers like us. There's also a whole nother class. There's, there's uniform companies, for example, that process a lot of uniforms. They're essentially big laundries that are constantly washing things. Yeah. And there's a, a significant amount that can't be put back into use and they're landfill that right now also hospitals use a lot of textiles, law enforcement uses a lot of textiles, universities do.

4 (24m 58s):
So those are all great sources of of post-consumer waste that doesn't necessarily have to come from a household.

2 (25m 4s):
I mean it seems like that's, but that seems like another business entirely. We had TerraCycle on the show a couple weeks ago and they obviously have a really robust, you know, network of, of collecting waste, but you guys are processing it. You can't also, at least for now also collect it. So how do you, how do you get people to send you stuff? How do you get these factories to send you stuff? How do you build partnerships? How are you doing it?

4 (25m 33s):
Yeah, we are attacking that problem from a, a couple angles. We are working with people that are just focused on the collection and aggregation of waste. We're working directly with factories that have waste when we work with brands. You mentioned Zara for example. We also ask them about their waste and about their factories and to, to direct us to those factories or to direct those factories to give us their waste. So, so that, that's been somewhat effective right now. But I think there's still opportunity here. The circular ecosystem has opportunities all all over the place.

2 (26m 11s):
So tell me a little bit about how you were able to sort of scale it up and presumably, I know you raised some money from a, you know, over time from different venture funds including Bill Gates's Venture Fund. I think you've raised now something like over $40 million. Is that about, is that about right?

4 (26m 30s):
Yeah, in the last year alone we've raised about 50 million.

2 (26m 34s):
Wow, okay. And and tell me about the facility that you built.

4 (26m 38s):
Yeah, so we are at a commercial pilot scale at about five tons per day in Springfield, Ohio and in Danville, Virginia. And we are doing that with engineering partners that provide equipment and, and other solutions to various industries. And that's how we've been able to build our, and scale our solution very quickly. But the bulk of the funds we've recently raised are going towards the engineering and planning for our first really large scale integrated facility. And that would process about 65,000 tons per year.

2 (27m 15s):
So how much capacity do, do you expect to have to be able to like, I don't know, I dunno if you can quantify it in a way that's easy to understand instead of like tons or like, I don't know, like a million t-shirts a month or I don't know what Yeah, where, where are you now?

4 (27m 34s):
Yeah, so we are, you could say roughly 15,000, 20,000 garments a day or current scale. So something more about 250,000 garments a day.

2 (27m 47s):
So, and and how long does it take to process one, just seconds?

4 (27m 51s):
Yes. It, it happens very, very quickly from, and it's a continuous process two, so we're now doing it in a continuous way, but the from end to end it's about 15 minutes. Wow.

2 (28m 2s):
So you guys teamed up with Zara earlier this year and, and you've released, have you released this line yet?

4 (28m 10s):
We did. It was a four piece collection we released back in May during design week in Milan. It was the world's first collection made from poly cotton waste,

2 (28m 20s):
Entirely from poly cotton waste. And you're, you're, you're like a label is sewn in along alongside the Zara label.

4 (28m 29s):
Yeah. I should also say their investors, we were their first technology investment and they've been fantastic partners to, to work with and it's not common for a brand to share that key real estate on a, on a garment with another company. And so we were very proud that they, they agreed to put our name there.

2 (28m 50s):
Yeah, so, so gimme a sense of where you, where you guys are headed. I mean, I mean right now you've got a partnership with Zara and, and they're an investor as well. And, and do you have other partnerships in the works and, and, and what are you hoping to accomplish through those partnerships?

4 (29m 4s):
We have partnerships with various brands. Some of 'em of course are investors like, like Patagonian, Zara, Avery Dennison is another one, Zalando in Europe. And we have a calendar set out for several more product releases. And those product releases are really important because they help us educate consumers. As you mentioned, we're buying this stuff and we're feeding this, this industry. and I think it's for so many reasons. I mean, clothing is such a, a personal thing. I like to say it's the only artistic thing most people do every day. And when it doesn't match your values, that's a, that's a challenge. And so that reckoning is, is starting to happen now in the industry for, for clothing?

4 (29m 45s):
Hmm.

2 (29m 48s):
Do you, I mean, as I mentioned earlier, the, the fashion industry is a huge, and I'm not, you know, I don't mean to, to sort of single them out 'cause I, every, all of us are responsible. We buy the clothing and we wear it. And the fashion industry is serving human consumers who are buying their products. Right. Especially fast fashion brands are, are some of the worst offenders. And again, not them, us as consumers 'cause we support, we support those, those practices. But I mean, if in fact the companies are, you know, are using a hundred percent recycled material to produce, you know, articles of clothing, I have to assume they're still, they're still problems though, right?

2 (30m 36s):
I mean, 'cause they're still dying. The clothing, they're still producing wastewater, for example. Like, I mean, they may not be using virgin plastic or cotton, but there are still challenges that they will have to resolve.

4 (30m 49s):
Absolutely. I I think most people don't know who makes their clothing, how it's made, where it's where it comes from, including fashion executives. And so that's, that's a big, big, big challenge. And so we're starting with, with non virgin materials is, is just the beginning. You also have to think about labor, water usage, dye, your total lifecycle assessment, which is a, a term of art for how much greenhouse gas emissions you're, you're, you're producing. And so it's a really 360 problem that that has to be solved.

2 (31m 25s):
So gimme a sense of where, I mean, where you think this is headed. I mean, you know, obviously you're not, you know, I can't speak for Patagonia or Czar or some of your other investors, but I'm assuming they want a significant percentage, if not all of their clothing to be recycled. I mean, at the current rate of growth and pace, how much of their inventory do you think could be recycled material in like five or 10 years from now?

4 (31m 51s):
Yeah, well, Inditex, the parent of Zara just put out their targets where they want to have 40% of their clothing made from recycled sources and additional 25% from next generation materials, which we would fall in both categories. and you also have regulation coming, you know, now you have this, this huge industry that's super optimized that has to, to fix itself and has largely been unregulated and I. Look at the paper recycling industry as a, as a great example. From 1990 to 2000, that industry added 60 million tons a year of annual capacity the following decade, another 70 million tons of annual capacity for a total of 130 million tons.

4 (32m 36s):
And that's right on the same order of magnitude as what we're doing today with textiles and So I think this, this very old and optimized industry can be transformed in 20 years and there's a lot of capital out there and a lot of traditional ways of doing things that we need to, to disrupt.

2 (32m 55s):
Pete, thank you so much.

4 (32m 56s):
Thank you.

2 (32m 59s):
That's Peter Major Romanowski co-founder and c e o of Circ. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. This episode was produced by Carla Estevez and edited by John Isabella with research help from J c Howard. Our music was composed by Rum Team Arablouei. Our audio engineer was James Willetts. Our production team includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Chris Masini, Elaine Coates, Ramel Wood, Sam Paulson, and Kerry Thompson. Neva Grant is our supervising editor. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members.

2 (33m 46s):
You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.