0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, checker. Want to diversify your workforce and change the future checkers background checks reduce hiring bias because the past shouldn't define what's ahead more@checkr.com slash NPR. So you get these catalogs 15 or 20,000 catalogs. And how did you do, how many orders did you get from those?

2 (29s):
So we put those catalogs and then I'm just waiting for the phone during and waiting and waiting. Okay. And I think we got a whopping, maybe 15 orders. Maybe seven of them were from someone that I did not know.

0 (50s):
Wow. That's for mailing out over 20,000 catalogs. That's the hit rates,

2 (54s):
Super sad, super sad

0 (1m 4s):
Ramen PR. That's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how Missy parks, frustration with bad fitting sports gear led her to launch title nine. One of the very first American sportswear brands exclusively for women. About a year ago, I was riding my bike near the railroad tracks in Berkeley, California. When I passed a clothing store with an unusual name, the store was called title nine, and I thought it might have something to do with a law, but a lot, I couldn't remember right at that moment.

0 (1m 52s):
So a few days later I looked it up. Title IX, I was reminded, was a U S civil rights law passed in 1972. It prohibited discrimination based on sex in any federally funded school or educational program. And among the things the law did was to open up high school and college sports to women, colleges and universities that received federal dollars now had to provide the same opportunities for women to participate in sports as they did for men. According to the women's sports foundation before 1972, just one in 27, young women played sports today.

0 (2m 36s):
The number is two out of five in that year, 1972, less than 20% of all the athletes on the U S Olympic team were women. But by 2016, nearly 55% of the team was female. And much of this is because of title nine. The same year title nine was required to take effect in schools. 1976, Missy park joined her high school basketball team in Greenville, South Carolina. She'd go on to play division one basketball at Yale, but after years of wearing bad fitting sports apparel, as a student athlete, Missy decided to solve her own problem.

0 (3m 18s):
And in 1989, long before anyone would hear the names, Lulu lemon or Athleta, Missy park founded, title IX, one of the first brands to make sports apparel for women. Now today, many of those other brands are multi-billion dollar companies either backed by venture capital or publicly traded. But title IX is comparatively small. This year. It will do roughly a hundred million dollars in revenue and unlike its competitors, title IX is owned only by one person, Missy park. She bootstrapped the brand from day one and built it very, very slowly.

0 (3m 59s):
If the company grew by five or even 10% a year, that was considered a victory and that slow growth has allowed the company to build a sustainable and supportive culture. Missy park grew up in the sixties, seventies in Greenville, South Carolina, in the foothills of the smoky mountains. Her dad was a world war II veteran and became kind of an overnight entrepreneur when he bought the small manufacturing company that he once worked for. And as for her mom,

2 (4m 31s):
My mom on the other hand was a stay at home mom. And we always accuse her of being part of a secret feminist cell in Greenville, South Carolina, and the sixties,

0 (4m 43s):
Because she was what

2 (4m 45s):
She thought women ought to be paid for. Birthing babies. Yeah, I would say that was pretty ahead of her time. My mom and dad had separate checking accounts. I remember my mom fighting to get her credit card in her own name rather than in Mrs. Russell Hunter park. So my mom loved being a full-time homemaker, but she thought it was a position worth paying for,

0 (5m 8s):
And this was really, I mean, this was people don't remember. I mean, the seventies was, I mean, this was the era of era equal rights amendment and of Shirley Chisholm and Bella Abzug, you know, with her hats, right. There was huge leaps and strides that happened in the seventies. And from your description of your mom, she was either secretly harboring those feelings or maybe not so secretly harboring them.

2 (5m 34s):
Yeah, well, you know, my parents were so unusual. Like my mom was in charge of the girls and, and our allowances and we had budgets and we had to reconcile at the end of every month and we had to give money to savings and to offerings and each year we would take on other responsibilities. It was her expectation that we would go up to be financially independent women capable of running our own finances and our own life. Yeah.

0 (6m 5s):
And as a little girl, or maybe even a young teen, did you know for sure you were not going to end up living in Greenville, South Carolina?

2 (6m 17s):
No. I would say I'm the kind of person that may be everybody else is for sure about it. And no, one's more surprised than me. You know, I, I really loved growing up in Greenville. It was at the time, a great place for me, it's a small place. I could ride my bike everywhere. I was in that first generation of girls and women that were able to grow up with title nine, being in effect all the way through high school and all the way through college.

0 (6m 47s):
And of course, title nine just kind of opened up sports for, for women and girls at the time. And, and you got to play lots of things.

2 (6m 56s):
Yes. I got to play every sport, you know, I mean, I coming up when I did, especially as a girl, you just played all the sports and if you were willing to play and you were willing to try, you were pretty good because there weren't as many women pouring into the sports and fields as there are now. So yes, we will say guy. I think that I was a big fish in a very small pond. What that's, what else?

0 (7m 23s):
Well, I'm curious because here you are, you were in a small Southern town in the seventies, being a debutante is, was some extent still is, but less, less. So was a kind of a cultural phenomenon in the south. Was there like where you would Debbie time for example,

2 (7m 43s):
Oh my gosh. I hate your guts right now. So let's just go on the record right now. I hate your guts. Yes. I was a debutante now you and me and all of your listeners know that. And in my home office here, you could see my little rebellion against that. There's a picture of me at what about 19 and a white gown with long gloves that actually won't go up above my upper arm and biceps sadly, and I'm spinning a basketball and I had my basketball sneakers on.

0 (8m 19s):
So you were forced or kind of pressured to be a debutante,

2 (8m 24s):
The danger of things like that. Yeah. I'm just a kid. This is where I grow up. And now I look back on it and I'm see it differently, but it was one of those things, you know, I love my mom and dad and had very quickly understood. Like there's some battles that if you can give in and it's not much skin off my back, then I should just do it because it's going to make my mom so happy. But it is the source of a lot of amusement, a much my family and close friends more because it's so different from who

0 (8m 59s):
You are from who

2 (8m 60s):
I am.

0 (9m 1s):
Yeah. And how would you describe yourself as a teenager? Were you, did you get along with everybody? Were you a pleaser?

2 (9m 12s):
Definitely not about what he's or I would say I'm pretty loud. I speak before. I think I have strong opinions that can change quickly. I think I was an okay student. I think I got along well with most folks.

0 (9m 30s):
Yeah. I mean, you must've been better than an okay student. Cause you went to Yale, you tend to Yale.

2 (9m 37s):
Yeah. Yeah. Well, I will also tell you this, that I, we joke about it, my family, but my parents single greatest failing is that they have a daughter that went to Yale

0 (9m 47s):
Because

2 (9m 49s):
There's an awful lot of good schools in the south. And there are, so I think that, I think my parents really wanted me to go to one of those great Southern schools.

0 (10m 0s):
All right. You're at 1980, I think about 1980, you get to new Haven. Yup. You played several sports there. Lacrosse tennis and basketball. You are an athlete. That is your, was that your identity, your self identity as an athlete. Yeah. You get to Yale. You're Missy park, the basket,

2 (10m 18s):
The ballplayer. Yes. The Southern basketball player when I get to Yale.

0 (10m 22s):
Yeah. And just to be clear, there were, there were women's sports right at, at Yale. They had been for a long time. Yep. Yep. But the difference when you got there was title nine, which had been, was passed in 1972 was in full effect. Right. And so what did that mean when you were, when you got to Yale in 1980 as a student athlete?

2 (10m 43s):
Well, I think a lot with my generation in particular guy, you know, yes. Title nine was passed. Yes. The seventies had happened, but we were still in that place of everything that we gain is a loss for the guys on the other side of it. Right.

0 (11m 3s):
That was a perspective that you, as a woman athlete are taking away resources from me as a male athlete.

2 (11m 12s):
Exactly. And in some ways, yes, that was true. It's like all of a sudden the men's basketball team doesn't have the pick of all of the basketball practice times they have to share them with the women's team.

0 (11m 27s):
Did those four years feel like there were battles? Yeah.

2 (11m 31s):
Well I think it also, it goes to sort of the Genesis of title nine, the company is, you know, me and my teammates are getting uniforms that are hand-me-down men's uniforms. I remember my, my buddy Regina Sullivan, she wore, I think like a size six and a half women's shoe, but don't make women choose. So she had to go to like the little kids department at Macy's and buy some little boys sneakers. So the sense of having to create the traditions around a team, what it means to get success while at the same time fighting for the good practice times marketing support in the community, those were battles being fought on two fronts.

2 (12m 21s):
For sure. And as I said, the Genesis of title nine, I mean, I remember my buddies and I were all like, ah, when we graduated from college, we're going to go get some experience and then we're going to start the women's version of Nike. Of course. Wow. They all went and got really good jobs, you know,

0 (12m 41s):
Investment banking, finance,

2 (12m 44s):
Procter, and gamble, Microsoft. And that was the only one that actually ended up not getting one of those good jobs. So I had to figure out something else to do.

0 (12m 53s):
All right. You graduate in around 84. And from what I gather, you want it, you decided that you'd go into, into coaching that maybe you would like explore becoming a professional coach of some sort.

2 (13m 5s):
Right. I was lucky enough to be offered a job at our arch rival at Harvard. And then I found it very difficult to coach against my former teammates and a job opened up at Yale the following year. But I think I realized at that point that coaching a team was never going to be the same thing as playing on a team.

0 (13m 33s):
Yeah. I, there's a book by David Epstein called the sports gene and he makes an analogy between a player and a coach. And the analogy is just because you're a bird, it doesn't mean you can be an ornithologist. And I think that's right.

2 (13m 51s):
Well, yes.

0 (13m 54s):
And I think that's right. All right. So you realize that that, that college or basketball coach coaching is not the right fit for you. And it's the mid eighties. You're from Greenville, South Carolina. You're living in new England. What got you out to the west coast?

2 (14m 11s):
I knew I didn't want to live in the south. Okay. I knew I didn't want to be cold. Fair enough. I knew I didn't have any money. My brother lived in California, so I packed up my, I had a Toyota pickup truck. I packed up all of my worldly belongings and my parents had given me a tent for graduation from college because they knew exactly what I would want. Like what Southern pair. I mean, like who would do that? Right. But they knew I wanted a tent. So I, in those days you had the seam seal the tent to seal up all the little needle holes.

2 (14m 56s):
So it wouldn't leak and unrolling the tent and I'm taking off the hang tag. And I look at it, it says the north face 9, 9, 9 Harrison street, Berkeley, California. Wow. So I moved in with my brother. I'd also led some bike trips for kids. And so I really loved cycling. And I was like, okay, I either want to work for a bike company or I want to work for the north face. Yeah. So I started just walking into bike shops, asking them, you know, about bike companies that were in California and how I might get a job. And one of those bike shops, I ran into a guy by the name of Michael Phillips who happened to be a sales rep for some old bike brand.

2 (15m 47s):
And he's like, you're looking for a job. It's like, well, why don't you come ride with me in my van for a day while I call on customers, I can teach you about the business. Wow. Well, my brother had different ideas, right. I was like, this guy's creepy. Don't do exactly. Right. So while that was going on, Michael, and then at the same time, I was kind of trying to find my way into the north face. And I had heard at the time that there was another young woman about my age that was leading up the equipment division at the north face a woman by the name of Sally McCoy, who was from Charlotte, North Carolina, and had gone to Dartmouth and was a little bit older than I was. So I was like, okay, she's the person I need to talk to, but I can't get anybody.

2 (16m 32s):
Right. You know, you're not emailing people. Like maybe you write them a letter. I don't know what you do. Well, what I do is I find out 9, 9, 9 Harrison street and I walk into the reception area and I'm like, ah, I I'd like to see Sally McCoy. Well, do you have an appointment? No, I don't. But well, she's busy. I'm like, okay, well I'll just wait. So I wait and I wait and I'm there pretty much all day. And finally this guy comes down the stairs, jump into the front lobby.

2 (17m 12s):
And he's like, you know, you've been here a long time. Is there anybody helping you? I'm like, well, no, I really want to talk to this woman, Sally McCoy. But she seems to be very busy. He goes, well, well, maybe I can help you. This guy's name was Mark Erickson. And he was, I think the vice-president of product, I was super disappointed to be talking to him, but he ended up getting my foot in the door at the north face. And I ended up meeting Sally McCoy and a really interesting group of business women. And that was really my first exposure to a real job.

0 (17m 59s):
I mean, it it's interesting because you wanted to work for that company. You were a student athlete and you were really passionate. And one of your principles as a, as a leader is hire for passion. You can train people to do the business stuff. Don't worry about skills or training, like hire for passion, which I think is a thousand percent, right? Like people have to believe in the mission of what you're doing. That's more important than anything else. And then you can train them.

2 (18m 26s):
Well, I think that was it. I, they had this thing that needed doing, and it was very entrepreneurial. You just had such a broad range of things that you could do. I mean, they strongly believed in the it's easier to be forgiven than to obtain permission role. Yeah. So it's a great, and I honestly, you know, I think about it, it was such a good ad. So the first job I got strangely enough was putting together a retail point of sale catalog for them. So it's going to be like a magazine that was going to sit in their retail stores. I mean, I don't have any skills. I mean, like literally zero skills and there I am working with a graphic designer.

2 (19m 11s):
I'm working with photographers. I'm going on photo shoots. I wrote copy for about products that I didn't really know anything about. Fortunately there was a lot of supervision. I really wasn't doing all that, but I was sort of the person kind of making sure everything held together in the end.

0 (19m 30s):
Yeah. And by the way, I think while you were at north face, you, you met someone who worked there who would eventually become your life partner, your wife, right.

2 (19m 41s):
That's right. Actually, how I met her is Sally had recommended that all of the managers, Sally McCoy, original woman, I wanted to talk to had recommended that all the managers take a look and see if they had any job openings. And Dana, my wife happened to have one. So I actually interviewed with Dana for the job that she had that I really, really wanted, even though I was colossally unsuited for it. So I did not get the job, but more importantly, I, I got the girl and the truth of the matter is that my buddy Michael Phillips, who was not an ax murderer, but ended up being a very good man who mentored me.

2 (20m 28s):
He actually hooked me up with Fisher mountain bikes. And I applied for a job there. I didn't get the job at Fisher mountain bikes, but I, my parents raised me. Right. And they told me to make sure to write, thank you notes. And the person they did hire ended up not working out. And they called me and said, Hey, the job's yours if you want it. So I went to work at Fisher, which was one of the first, if not the first

0 (20m 57s):
Yeah. My company. Yeah. I think it was Gary Fisher. Right? Yeah. I mean, these are pioneers of like outdoor gear of mountain biking.

2 (21m 5s):
Yeah. It's

0 (21m 7s):
Amazing.

2 (21m 8s):
Yeah. And I think good job experience is wasted on the young that's what I can not short version is that. So I went to work at Fisher in inside sales and that was me calling on bike shops, but suffice it to say most bike shop guys were not used to having a woman calling them on the phone. So,

0 (21m 33s):
I mean, he must've really stood out. I mean, here we are talking in 2021, you've been in California since 1985. And I mean, your accent sticks out. Right. I mean, you really rarely run into people in Berkeley with a South Carolina accent. No,

2 (21m 51s):
I know. Yeah. I think I stuck out for good or real.

0 (21m 56s):
And, and, and you were, from what I read, I think your brother lived across the bay, south of the airport in foster city. Eventually, presumably you moved to, to Berkeley because you were working for, you would work for Fisher and for north.

2 (22m 13s):
Yes. I had a job with a paycheck, so I can afford to have a room in a house.

0 (22m 19s):
W when you were a student athlete, right. You imagine we're already thinking about the fact that the clothing made for women athletes was not well thought out while you were working at north face. You were, from what I read, like you were thinking about this like problem that there were, there was no good athletic gear for women. Yeah.

2 (22m 44s):
You know, guy, it's, it's funny because here's the thing I think about a lot. I mean, I'm assuming, you know, about the narrative fallacy, right? Like this idea that we end up at a certain place, and then we make up this really nice story that proceeds logically from point a to point Z. And that's just, it's just, it's just a lie. So I wanted to tell all this to you, but it's going to be completely misleading that like, oh, and then I went to Yale where I found real fitting uniforms, and then I went to the north face and was frustrated. But no, I was just, well, I guess I think I used to think I do use an old school analogy.

2 (23m 25s):
I used to think I was the person operating the flippers on the pinball machine. I'm the ball. Right. You know, I mean, and I think that's, so I'm having all of these experience

0 (23m 38s):
Running around. Right.

2 (23m 40s):
I'm just bouncing around 500 points, free balls. Yay. Okay. I'm going to play. I'm going to keep, but so, so I, I want to make sure like that part of it is clear. This was, I mean, I am, I am not foresighted enough to have planned what happened to me

0 (23m 58s):
And just to be clear, almost nobody who's been on the show is there's no, I can't think of a single story where somebody said, you know, I was 18. I had this vision now I'm 55. And, and you know, it, it kind of unfolds over time and it's, it's like being the ball in the pinball machine.

2 (24m 15s):
Exactly. And I think that's it, you know, so I can look back and I can see the thread. It's like, I can look back on my time as a kid, you know, I'm like eight or nine or 10 years old. And at the time there was basically one sports magazine, sports illustrated. And I would go through every single one of them and try and find pictures of women athletes. And I would painstakingly cut them out and put them on a poster board and have it up in my room. So you could say like, it was already in me then I wasn't thinking like, and therefore I am going to start a women's athletic apparel company.

2 (24m 57s):
Right. But the seeds were there early, trying to create a vision of what I could be.

0 (25m 4s):
What was women's sportswear in, in the eighties? I mean, Nike had been making stuff, but what did that mean?

2 (25m 12s):
Oh, well it was kind of a Earobics right. Jane Fonda. It's kind of that kind of stuff. I mean, I think about, you know, for me, when you play college sports, you'd get all your gear given to you, ill fitting or not. It's given to you, it's given to you, they wash it for you. If it wears out, you get a new one, it's not your concern. Then I graduated from college and all of a sudden I'm having to buy my own gear. And there's nowhere to find anything that's built or designed specifically women that, you know, there's no Lulu Lemon's, there's no, there's, there's nothing. Literally there is nothing.

2 (25m 53s):
And really, I mean, if you think about it, it it's just math. Right. Title nine was passed in 72. So I was in that first generation, there was no market.

0 (26m 5s):
Well, what was it that, I mean, you're 27 and you decide at that age to start your own business where you frustrated working in for a bigger company. Did you, were you just one of these people who had to be your own boss? How did you, what do you remember about that time in your life that led you to, to that decision?

2 (26m 30s):
Well, I would say probably that, you know, I think about the north face, I had great jobs, but I'm 26 and I'm like, boy, these guys are kind of idiots. If they can run these businesses and anybody can do

0 (26m 50s):
Everything, of course

2 (26m 51s):
You do. So it was frustration. They wouldn't do everything that I wanted them to do. They probably don't even pay any attention to me. I'm like some entry-level person, you know, they're busy. They've actually got important decisions to make where I'm down here, seeing how idiotic everything is. So I'm so confident.

0 (27m 14s):
Right. I remember that feeling. Yeah.

2 (27m 16s):
And I think my favorite part about it is just like, and now guy, I'm the idiot,

0 (27m 24s):
But you know what, here's the thing. Cause we're both, we're both talking, we're both older and we're talking about remembering that feeling. And if you are listening and you are 26, it's okay to think that I'm an idiot or Mrs. India, because that's the fuel, you need to do something stupid enough to start a business that will ultimately be a good decision. Right.

2 (27m 45s):
I mean, those are very like people say, oh, how did you do that when you were 26? And I have to say, it's the only time to do it.

0 (27m 54s):
Yeah. And, and this is 1989, I think when you decide to start the business and what, what, what did you tell yourself? Did you say, you know, I'm going to start a women's apparel company. Cause it's always been on my mind. Like what, what, what did, how did you describe it to people and it's so, so what are you going to do now? Messy.

2 (28m 11s):
Well, first I did zero market research. My market research was me and my friends, which let's just be very clear as a very small group. You just said,

0 (28m 19s):
Hey, would you use this?

2 (28m 22s):
Hey, you need shorts. That fit women. Don't you, you have me too. But I had enough to say, okay, there's not enough people in Berkeley, California to support a retail store just for women athletes. So I need to do something that's more national. So I can find all the women who need workout and fitness skier. So I did sort of, what is the precursor to the internet? Is that was a mail order catalog.

0 (28m 59s):
Did you have, I mean, let's just back up for a sec. I mean, w what kind of money did you have to start an apparel company? Presumably you had some savings from your

2 (29m 11s):
Exactly. I had like 30,000 bucks and I can tell you,

0 (29m 15s):
Yeah. I mean, that's a nice, nice amount of cash. Yeah. Yeah.

2 (29m 18s):
Okay. But what people were telling me is, you know, this time, right? This is a 1989, and I'm talking to as many people as I could possibly talk to. I'm calling anybody. That'll talk to me on the first

0 (29m 31s):
King.

2 (29m 32s):
Ah, Hey, I've decided I want to start a mail order catalog. You have started one. And all of them told me if you're going to do this, you need at least a half, a million dollars

0 (29m 43s):
To start a mail order, catalog business. Cause this was 89. This is how you market it. You sent out millions of catalogs and then hopefully people

2 (29m 52s):
Or not millions guy or not mail

0 (29m 54s):
Or not. Okay. So people said, you need, you need at least a half, a million bucks to make this work. Yep. That's intimidating.

2 (30m 1s):
Yeah. Yeah. As like, well, I don't have a half a million dollars. I have, I have $30,000. So I call up my dad. I said, so dad, I'm super excited. Cause I'm, I've got an idea for a business. And the best part about it is that no one else is doing it and he's quiet for a second. And he said, there might be a good reason for that. Missy,

0 (30m 36s):
When we come back in just a moment, tell Missy struggles for months and then years to get title IX going and how she discovers even one item of clothing that will give the business a much needed boost. Stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

3 (31m 7s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that's successful. Financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy, flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan

0 (31m 27s):
Support for how I built. This comes from 3m committed to protecting healthcare workers, globally. 3m employee. Chris knows that healthcare workers like his daughter may need to get up close to provide patient care. He's working hard to direct high performing personal protective equipment to hospitals and hotspots. So she and nurses like her can be protected while caring for their patients. Hear their story at 3m.com/improving lives. 3m science applied to life. This message comes from NPR sponsor, discover, discover matches all the cash back. You earn on your credit card at the end of your first year, automatically with no limit on how much you can earn.

0 (32m 10s):
It's amazing because of all the places where discover is accepted 99% of places in the U S that take credit cards. So when it comes to discover, get used to hearing, yes, more often learn more at discover.com/match. 2021 Nelson report limitations apply

4 (32m 34s):
In 1999. The music industry began cranking out. Latin music meant to crossover. How do we make it Latin without being too loud? Some of the inspiration came from strange places, channeling more. We unpack Pop's Latin explosion. Listen now to, it's been a minute from NPR.

0 (33m 1s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 1989 and Missy has decided to quit her job and put $30,000 of her own money into launching a mail order catalog for women's sportswear. And that $30,000 is pretty much all she has to spend on everything, including the clothes.

2 (33m 25s):
But the good news is if there are all these big manufacturers and small manufacturers who are starting to think about the coming women's market. Now, the retail stores are not necessarily buying this stuff because obviously they're worried about the customer coming in today, but these manufacturers have to think about tomorrow. So lots of manufacturers were starting to what they used to call shrink it and pink it. And I think they still call it that they take their men's stuff and they do it over in pink and call it a day and make it smaller. So, but the good news about that is there were a lot of also small brands of women, my age, or a little bit older who were also starting to design and manufacturer women's.

0 (34m 14s):
So the idea was that you were not going to manufacture your, your own stuff. You were going to find it right. You can afford, you're going to find manufacturers, buy their stuff and then put it in the CA have a catalog. And that, that would be it. And eventually I'm assuming you got connected to probably smaller manufacturers. Yeah,

2 (34m 34s):
Exactly. So, yes, I could, we could have gone into manufacturing and that probably would have cost me a half, a million dollars more I an unlimited amount of money. But what I realized pretty quickly as there were enough of these small brands, you know, Pearl Izumi moving comfort was like the first women's running brand. So I started calling on folks like that and you know, mostly what I did is, well, one again, I don't ha I'm operating out of a garage in the house that I have a room

0 (35m 10s):
In like a group house with other yeah.

2 (35m 14s):
I'm living in a group house and I wanted the cheapest rent. So I got the room that was actually the garage. Nice. So, yeah. Nice. So I have to go outside to go to the bathroom, come back in the house, go to bed. Yeah. Whatever. And I'm trying to get these manufacturers to talk to me, but they're not going to talk to me if I'm meeting them in my garage. So I would go down my brother's office in foster city. I can't remember where he was and I would meet people there in his office. So it would be like official, right. White Bree, Starbucks.

0 (35m 50s):
Really.

2 (35m 52s):
It was pretty everything. So how am I going to fake this? Yeah. And then finally, what I'm asking is like, so what what's going on here? And it ended up being the sales rep for moving comfort. And so then I just said, well, I'm, I'm starting. And I really, I don't have an office as my brother's office. And she was very kind to me. She said, well, look, I'm going to, I've met you. I can see you're real. Why don't we just come out, just come and show you the line and I'll show it to you and your living room and moving comfort was one of the first businesses that, I mean, they became our bank.

0 (36m 31s):
I mean, they, they were a manufacturer moving comfort,

2 (36m 34s):
A brand like

0 (36m 35s):
Nike, small, small one. And they, they were like, okay, we're, we're willing to work with you. And at this point, I know it's mainly you by yourself. Right. Actually running the company. But I mean, did you have any help or, or support?

2 (36m 49s):
Yes. I just was surrounded by a whole bunch of people who were willing and fired up about this idea. My teammates, right. I was playing ultimate Frisbee. My teammates were my early models. And then one of my teammates happened to be a woman who was an editor at a women's sports and fitness magazine. So she became my first copy editor. She had a friend who was a graphic designer. So she designed the catalog for free. I had another friend who I met playing basketball and she designed because you had to have a corporate package.

2 (37m 33s):
I don't know why, but that's what you needed. A corporate package was like a logo, a letterhead envelopes, all these things.

0 (37m 42s):
You have to call it a brand Bible. Now I think, yeah, you

2 (37m 44s):
Had to have that. So my friend Lisa did it all and threw in a t-shirt for $90. Okay. That sounds like a good price.

0 (37m 54s):
And the name, the name, which is a great name. Was it, had you thought of that name?

2 (37m 58s):
Yeah, that was the thing that was kind of hanging me up is I couldn't come up with a name. I come up, I've gone through like four or five and somebody had all of them a, you know, I was like, oh, it'll be cheetah sports because the female cheetah is whatever faster. And then I remember I was up on Telegraph, maybe walking around Moe's books or that other bookstore that was right next to it. And I was just looking through books and I picked up this book and it was writing about the history of women's sports in America. And I started reading it and I was like, oh, title nine.

2 (38m 40s):
That's what our name, Mike. And that was it. You know, no one wanted that name unsurprisingly. So I named it title nine, after that piece of legislation that ensured that I got to play sports all the way through high school and college.

0 (38m 56s):
And you were, the idea was you were going to sell like, like running shorts and tights and things like that. Yeah.

2 (39m 4s):
Well remember the customer was me, so very narrow group of people, but it was me. I had, we had tight, we had running shorts, we had cycling shorts. We really didn't have much in the way of tops because you got all your tops for free at the races and the tournament. So I was not emergent.

0 (39m 25s):
I mean, it's, it's interesting because today, you know, tell on is, is very well known for sports prize for women, but that was not like you weren't thinking, oh, we're going to sell sports bras.

2 (39m 36s):
Well, so I put together this assortment of stuff and it's a tiny little flyer of stuff. And I really do not know anything about the apparel industry. And I knew what I was able to glean at the north face, but I'm just putting, assembling a group of merchandise that I can get people to sell to me on credit. And then at the last minute I got in touch with a sales rep who was representing two women who had invented, I didn't know this at the time, but it invented the first sports bra. And I'm super flat chested. We're going to say AA on a good day. So that's an afterthought for me, but this guy was a guy because most of the sales reps at that time were guys.

2 (40m 20s):
Right. He, he says, you know, I really think you ought to put these sports bras in there.

0 (40m 26s):
We're sports bras widely used in tonight. Oh no. So what did women do? Who were women athletes do?

2 (40m 35s):
They were two and three bras guy. Oh wow. So anyway, it's almost an afterthought. We bought some sports bras and we'd done all the shooting. It was all in color. And so I just had time to take some real quick black and white photos and we put them on what was then called the order

0 (40m 53s):
Forms in the catalog. Yeah.

2 (40m 55s):
And in the catalog. And then there's an order form in there. And so I put them in there and I think we send out like 15,000 catalog,

0 (41m 6s):
By the way, I'm looking at a photo, some photos from that first catalog. And it is not a slick production at all. It is. I mean, it's cool. Cause like all the, all the models are, are ATLA women athletes. And they're not like glamour shots or some action shots, but they're very authentic. And these were like, these were your friends.

2 (41m 27s):
Yep. I'll I'll like people like mostly that I played ultimate Frisbee with or went road riding or mountain biking with, or that I worked with at the north face,

0 (41m 38s):
Got the catalog up and running. And I'm assuming you had to order a bunch of stuff with your small amount of capital you had and just hold it in your, in your, where, where you lived in your room and hope hoping that some, that it would all be sold.

2 (41m 57s):
Yeah. And our suppliers where our banker. So I would order stuff let's say in November. And then I would say, I'd like for you to ship it to me in may, and then I would like to pay you in September. Wow. I mean, it's a little bit of a Ponzi scheme.

0 (42m 19s):
Yeah. You're just hoping, hoping some, all right. So you get these catalogs 15 or 20,000 catalogs. And how did you do, how many orders did you get from those?

2 (42m 28s):
I put those catalogs and then I'm just waiting for the phone during

0 (42m 36s):
And

2 (42m 37s):
Waiting and waiting. Okay. And I think we got a whopping, maybe 15 orders. Maybe seven of them were from someone that I did not know. Wow.

0 (42m 50s):
That's from mailing out over 20,000 catalogs. That's the hit rate.

2 (42m 55s):
Super sexy.

0 (42m 56s):
Crazy. But that, but that makes statistical sense. You got to write, you're going to, your hit rate is going to be,

2 (43m 3s):
That makes statistical didn't make any sense to me. You're correct. But one thing that I did notice in this, that all of the people that I didn't know, and many of the ones I did know, put a sports bra on their order. And so while I may not have been the quickest study, you don't have to tell me twice. And I realized like, wow, sports bras. That is probably now I know the most essential piece of sports equipment for the average American woman.

0 (43m 39s):
Yeah. Th this is 1989 the year you start, I know that the first four years it was like really rough. And, but that first year, not only did you have, you're dealing with like cashflow issues, but that was your, the, the earthquake, the big bay area earthquake.

2 (44m 1s):
I remember, you know, I remember exactly because I was so relieved. There was an earthquake because we were going through the financials not to make light of the earthquake at all, but I just saw, I mean, it just is how much the finances played on me

0 (44m 22s):
Because you were watching not only your bank account window, but you owed people money. Right.

2 (44m 27s):
And just kinda, you know, the ways you think about it. So we did the first catalog. It went poorly, saw a little opportunity for sports bras. So I was going to make the most of that, that I could, but I was also even then trying to figure out like, okay, how do I kind of get out of this and just go back and get a job again. I can't just quit after one, but I'll do a second one. And it'll be super, super cheap. It'll just be like a folded up piece of paper. It's like super cheap. So I did a super cheap, folded up piece of paper. And it did a little better, even though it was a little worse.

0 (45m 6s):
You were from, from what I read, you would order a bunch of stuff and then you would sell it and then some money would come in and then you would use all that money to send out, to order more stuff and then send out the stuff to people who ordered it. So you were constantly at a cash like every right. It was like cash in and out, no cash constantly,

2 (45m 29s):
Constantly out of cash. And I remember like two times a year I would be. And even now I sort of have sort of stress reactions around these two times of year. It's the time when we're building up a lot of inventory. And you know, there are these two times when you have invested a lot of money in marketing, you've invested a lot of money in inventory and sales are going to come. You hope they're going to come, but you don't know if they are. And that kind of two times a year, I just I'd just be done.

0 (46m 5s):
You wanted to quit. Yeah. At one point in those in the first, I think maybe four years, you were like $200,000 in debt.

2 (46m 13s):
Yes. That was a lot of dough,

0 (46m 15s):
But you were thinking, all right, what, what could I do for a living?

2 (46m 20s):
Right. What can I do for a living where clearly I am self unemployable.

0 (46m 26s):
How did you deal with that stress? Did you, did you get depressed? Did you get anxious? Did you lash out?

2 (46m 34s):
Well, Dana actually had a real job and a good job. So her paycheck was supporting both of us. So by this time, you know, I wasn't taking any money out of the business. She was, she was

0 (46m 48s):
Only your girlfriend at the time and, and supporting you.

2 (46m 51s):
Yeah. Well, you know that that's a matter of laws or a matter of practice because we, we actually couldn't be officially married until believe it or not something like 2012 or 15, I mean, which is crazy. So what would I do in terms of the stress relief? And Dana reminds me of this all the time, because it's, you never get out of that. I mean, we're always in it for the rest of building a business, you have those times. And my solution then was to call my dad because he was, whenever I talked to him, he always just had like the one good piece of advice that I needed to hold on to. I remember very early on when I was ready to hang it up and I called him and I was just like, tad, I just, it's just, it's not happening.

2 (47m 37s):
I can't learn fast enough. I just don't think I can do it. And then he, he would just go to the business and he was like, well, tell me about your customers. Tell me about how much it costs you to get a new customer. Now, how much did it cost you to get a customer this time, last year? And he would just find the successes? Well, so I think that's the thing is those little lifelines that, that someone can offer you. It's not like, oh, and then we got a vest investor and I got a million dollars and everything was fine. It's like, no, there were a lot of little lifelines all along the road and continue to,

0 (48m 17s):
I read. And I don't know how much of a big deal this was, but I did see a reference to a flood that destroyed all the inventory at some point. What was that in your words, when you were in the garage, in the garage, How did a flood get in there?

2 (48m 36s):
I, what happened was we hit installed some racks in the garage and by we, I mean, Dana and she's handy, but not super handy. And they probably weren't installed in the most professional manner. So they came crashing down in the middle of the night, but we're not in the garage, we're asleep, we don't hear it. And then there's a rainstorm and you know, like Berkeley garages, there's just the water hooked up in there. And I think it was about that point where I decided it was time for us to get real office space.

2 (49m 20s):
I'm like, this is ridiculous. We need to stop doing this. It was probably shortly after that, we moved into, again, another converted warehouse, just a, it was next to an ice cream manufacturer. Also a small entrepreneurial led and every morning it would smell like chocolate when I came. So everything that we shipped out started smelling like chocolate.

0 (49m 44s):
All right. So those, those first four years there were moments where you really were like very seriously thinking that this was not going to work out, but I guess around 1993, you guys turned a profit for the first time. This was four years in probably not a huge profit, but a profit nonetheless. Yes. And what was that? The result of was it, w was it, you were just getting sort of better at managing things and more experienced? Did you hire people? What, what happened? Well,

2 (50m 16s):
You know, what I would say is it's just like staying in the game, right? I mean, that's just the best way I can describe it. It's just, for me, I'm just like, I'm going to just stay in the game here, but it kind of keep hitting little singles. And I think it's, it kind of goes to basically a business philosophy is just sort of fail faster to succeed sooner. And you know, if you're gonna make big mistakes, those take a long time, little mistakes. Don't take a very long time. You can make a lot of little mistakes really fast. So I think it was just because we didn't have anybody really, until we were over $40 million, we didn't have anybody who had retail experience, apparel experience, marketing experience, men.

2 (50m 59s):
We had, everybody was just true believers, product users that are really interested in women's outdoor gear and athletic apparel. That's it?

0 (51m 10s):
I think that the story of title IX is a story of hitting singles, which is actually a great strategy, right. And a strategy that you can really only do without having outside investors. Right. You can't do that. If you've got people who expect a 10 X return in five to 10 years, you can't just hit singles because no one's going to be that patient. Right. I mean, we've had apparel brands on the show that have raised venture money and, and, you know, D was that even on your radar, was that ever even anything you, you considered or thought about or was it just not even something that you thought was an option?

2 (51m 53s):
I think you always, it always has to stay on your radar because you never know what's going to happen. Right. But it's never a real option. I, I think the time I was most aware of how impossible it would be to go out and get investors is we had a president that the first president we had who came in and Estelle to Musee, she did a great job running the business. She she'd done everything. She'd bought businesses, sold businesses. And she came in and ran the business for awhile. And I said, you know, somebody contacted me from one of the big investment banks. I can't remember who now. And I told her Silva said, would you like to talk with this guy? Would you like us to talk to this guy? She's just like, sure.

2 (52m 33s):
Let's do it. Let's do it. So the guy comes and I'm meeting with him first. I really literally cannot remember his name anymore, but he comes into the office and I'm talking to him and guy, literally the longer I talk, the more nervous he is getting as if he has walked into some sort of alternate universe that does not speak his language.

0 (52m 56s):
What were you saying? Just about

2 (52m 58s):
How we've, you know, people want are riding by the door on scooters. So there's chaos. We play a lot of games at work, so there's a lot of stuff going on around. So he's walked into a foreign country, you know, maybe I'm talking about every year we do something called the title nine Olympics. And we divide up into teams and we play sports together for a day and people, you know, get hurt, hopefully not badly, but, you know, we, we play hard and that just didn't work in his investment banker mind. Right. And then a stele came in and she sits down and she starts talking to him. And that guy was so visibly relieved.

2 (53m 41s):
And just talking to her, I just was, I don't even know the language to talk. Yeah. So to answer your question, do we consider it yes. Would it have to be someone who is very different from me to really get that deal done? Yes. But by the same token, what I would say is if you hit singles, which we do, and we're good at, you're not going to hit a grand slam and that's just, you need to make your peace with that. And I think I would take the staying in the game of singles to striking out a whole bunch. And every once in a while, getting a grand slam

0 (54m 23s):
W once you became profitable, right? And again, it wasn't like buckets of money, but probably profitable enough where you could pay yourself a little bit of a salary. When were you able to actually hire people and pay them a salary?

2 (54m 38s):
Every time someone asks me that I'm taken back to my own decisions around that and how hard it was. You know, first we just had people who would help us out and volunteer. And then I remember, and this is probably one of the conflicts, and maybe it's something about being a female entrepreneur. I really want to go home to South Carolina for Christmas. And the phones were gonna ring and people were gonna want to place orders and return product. And I wanted to be in South Carolina. And I couldn't be because of the phones. And this was before call forwarding and all the stuff that you could do now. So I had a teammate and I said, Hey.

2 (55m 18s):
And she lived in California. I was like, would you be up for Minden the store while I go home for Christmas? And she said, sure. And I said, you know, what, if it works out, then maybe you can keep doing some work. And so that was really how I hired my first actual paid employee as Renee Thomas Jacobs. And we're still good friends. She ended up being our first president, but it felt like a big step. Like there's who can I afford to do this? Or should I just be working harder myself?

0 (56m 3s):
When we come back in just a moment, title nine keeps hitting singles until Missy makes some miscalculations. The company suddenly finds itself in a slump, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR Support for NPR comes from Hiscox committed to helping businesses protect their dreams since 1901, a business can start with an idea, a desire, a dream. And when you make that dream a reality, you can count on Hiscox to protect it from the risks you can't see coming with customized policies for hundreds of professions Hiscox can protect the business.

0 (56m 52s):
You've worked so hard to build quotes and more information are available@hiscox.com. Hiscox the business insurance experts support for this podcast. And the following message come from living proof. Does your hair need a fall reset reveal? Your hair's full, healthy potential with living proof. Their award winning products are engineered to solve the toughest hair problems. Never conceal them designed to leave you with cleaner, healthier, more brilliant hair for longer living proof products, never contain silicones, parabens and sulfates unlock your hair's natural brilliance@livingproof.com slash built.

0 (57m 33s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, discover, discover matches all the cashback. You aren't on your credit card at the end of your first year, automatically with no limit on how much you can earn. It's amazing because of all the places where discover is accepted 99% of places in the U S that take credit cards. So when it comes to discover, get used to hearing, yes, more often learn more at discover.com/match 2021 Nelson report limitations apply. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's the mid 1990s and title nine has only just become profitable.

0 (58m 15s):
And Missy is still running the company on a shoestring instill, looking for ways to get new customers.

2 (58m 23s):
The way we did it is the old fashioned way. You know, we went to a lot of races and, you know, tournament's, and we would sell stuff like our excess inventory. We would sell there. And we would build up our mailing list by doing that. And then the hard work of building a customer file, you know, selling people, a sports bra, selling a woman, a sports bra she can't do without, and you earn her trust on that. And she comes back to you for all of her athletic apparel needs. And, and to this day, I would say that we are much better at keeping our customers than we are at acquiring new ones.

2 (59m 5s):
That's just always, and I think that's, again, that sort of bootstrappy hitting singles. You know, our customers know that we get them, that we're product users and product testers, so that once they find us, they stay with us for a long time, but it's not like we're going out there and we're going to do a hundred million dollar marketing campaign. That's going to net us a whole bunch more new customers all at once. That's just never been the model.

0 (59m 31s):
W was that ever, was it always designed to be a direct cause it was, this was a direct to consumer business from the beginning. Was it, was that the model from the beginning? Did you ever think, you know, maybe we'll do a collaboration with, you know, Macy's or something,

2 (59m 46s):
You know, I think we just weren't sophisticated. I wasn't sophisticated enough to think like that. I was just, I want to control everything that I can, I know it's a delusion, but I still want to control it. Right. I mean, certainly people propose some, but I just couldn't, again, remember we're mostly selling other people's brands at this point. Yeah.

0 (1h 0m 6s):
But it was

2 (1h 0m 9s):
No it's just

0 (1h 0m 10s):
With whatever brand it was, whatever brand got it. Okay. And I guess eventually like, like eight years in or something, you, you finally opened up a store, like a brick and mortar store in Berkeley. Yep. And what's interesting to me is today we're looking at the women's apparel market and it's enormous, right? Like you really are the pioneer, you really created this category. Yep. With title nine. I mean, this is long before Lulu lemon or Athleta or outdoor voices, any of those existed at that 0.8 years in, did people get it or was it still a curiosity?

2 (1h 0m 49s):
You know, what the most incredible statistic about that first store was? The amazing thing about that store was that over 50% of the customers that came to that store came from more than two hours away.

0 (1h 1m 5s):
Wow. Who, who were they where they, where they high school athletes, college athletes, non

2 (1h 1m 13s):
Just women that want to work out what I would say, probably we think of our customers sort of like that 30 to 50 age range. And it was pretty much that then as well, you know, they're not, they have some disposable income because, you know, at that point direct or e-comm wasn't as big a thing that very few people were willing to buy something sight unseen. Yeah. But what we found mostly was people were coming from all over the country. Yeah. They were flying to SFO and they would come to our store. So we were really looking for that woman who is in the workforce now and is coming into her own either in aerobic studios or, you know, in the outdoors and needs to find the gear that works for the second piece though he'll say is our sports bra business ended up, there was a small piece of that that ended up being a big part of our business to high school and college athletes.

2 (1h 2m 18s):
Even now we, a lot of mother daughter, first trips to buy sports bras happened in our retail stores.

0 (1h 2m 27s):
I, I wonder, you know, one of the it's essentially, because I've heard you describe a low point in your career as a leader was during your first maternity leave, because obviously you were incredibly overjoyed at the birth of your first child. You were 37, you, you had a very difficult long labor and you, you just decided that you were the CEO and the founder and the, you didn't want to take a long leaf that you, you were back in the office pretty soon after the birth of

2 (1h 3m 1s):
Yeah. And I think, you know, that's some little bit of a hero complex there, right. You know, the business was doing well. I was still running the business at that point, but the business was doing well enough, but you know, I mean, that's the thing about running a business. You get so much positive reinforcement, especially if you're the founder owner, entrepreneur, you've done every job, you know, all the answers. And then I suppose there's something about like, wow, a new mom. I don't know any answers. I think I'd rather go back to the place where I know answers. I mean, if, you know, you want me to get into sort of the psychological underpinnings of that choice, you know, I had this picture, it's like a Polaroid Gilly.

2 (1h 3m 44s):
So she comes to the office with me and she was a newborn. Yeah, yeah. Really young. And she's all like a swaddled and she's on one of those Spinney chairs, like spinny rolly chairs. And she's just lying there, all swaddled up, like right on the chair. There's no one around I'm like, huh. But I think I needed to have that and realize like, wow, that's really, that's really screwed up. I gotta do better. But then I think now when people talk about work-life balance, I think, you know, there's really no such thing as balance. If you want to do something really great, whether that be a great mom or be a great entrepreneur or a great business person, you're really gonna have to dig in and have a lot of imbalance for awhile.

2 (1h 4m 37s):
But it always has to flip back. We're going to ride. There's going to be a teeter-totter sometimes it's going to be, I am really digging in on work and sometimes it's going to be, I'm really digging in on home. And then for those ordinary days, hopefully I get home in time for dinner every day,

0 (1h 4m 55s):
I think around 2000, you started to design and manufacture your own stuff and think today about half of what you sell in the shops and the website is your own design stuff. How, how involved were you in, in the designs?

2 (1h 5m 10s):
Oh, I mean, what I would say about us is mostly what we are, and I think you have to be, if you're going to be owner operated, we are very opportunistic. So the very first thing we ended up manufacturing ourself was a sports bra. And it was because I found a sports bra that someone else was selling and it was kind of a passion project for her. She was maybe a yoga teacher and she couldn't find a sports bra she'd liked. So she made this one, ended up being a top selling sports bra for us for many, many years. But at a certain point, she decided she was more interested in fitness instruction understandably than in making sports bras.

2 (1h 5m 57s):
So she said, Hey, I want to get out of this business. Would you like to buy the rights and designs for this? We called it the fraud bra. And I said, sure. And then she coached us up on, on how to get into the manufacturing business.

0 (1h 6m 15s):
Basically in the two thousands, there was an absolute explosion in women's apparel brands, Lululemon Athleta. Now there's outdoor voices, Nike and Adidas are making this stuff. We had chip Wilson on the show. We had Tyler Haney of outdoor voice on the, on the show. Before a few years ago, you started this category. You were the lonely voice in the wilderness saying, Hey, there's a market for women's athletic wear. But these other brands, which started after you became bigger, very fast, did that.

0 (1h 6m 56s):
How did you, what did you think about that? I mean, did you feel like you were under pressure to like compete and to grow faster and to, I don't know, was it frustrating to not get the recognition that, that maybe you felt you guys deserved?

2 (1h 7m 12s):
So kinda in the nicest way possible? What you're saying is why you let all those players come into squash? You like a bug?

0 (1h 7m 19s):
I'm not saying no, no,

2 (1h 7m 22s):
But it's, it's spot on. It's spot on. You know, so I played basketball in college and I have to tell you, I never played better basketball than when I was having to compete for a spot. Yeah. So, I mean, I think that having more folks in the field makes it helps us all raise our game at the same time. I'd say we're, in some ways we're competing on the same game, but in other ways we're not. Yeah. And to be really honest, if title on we're a publicly traded company, someone should fire me right now. I mean that, that's just the facts of it. They should fire me because the fact is the sole purpose of a publicly traded company or a private equity backed company is to maximize shareholder value in purely financial terms and plain and simple.

2 (1h 8m 14s):
I haven't done that, but I would say that at title nine, I have, I think we all have always measured that this idea of value creation much more broadly. And I think my philosophy, and I think it's all of our philosophy now can probably be summed up with one of my favorite sayings. Not all things that count can be counted. Yeah.

0 (1h 8m 37s):
I mean, you built a business that didn't, it was bootstrapped is bootstrapped. You never brought in outside investors. So you didn't have to make decisions that, that, you know, they wanted you to make, but there's a trade-off right. You don't, you don't explode. You don't go on the New York stock exchange. You don't, you're not a billionaire, right?

2 (1h 8m 58s):
Yeah. I mean, and I think it's, you know, when I think about that guy, I think about how this choice that we made and that we remake every day, it is informed by our business practices and it's everything from the suppliers we choose to who we choose to hire. I mean, probably at the most important way is that we have chosen to mentor up and coming female executives rather than some plug and play C level. You know, I said, I have to say one of the things I'm still very proud of is that we grew the business from probably zero to about 50 million with not one person that knew anything about retail or apparel or business at all.

2 (1h 9m 46s):
I mean, it's just like pure passion about women and the transformative power of sports. And, you know, we have this pitch Fest that we do twice a year for up and coming women run brands. I mean, I am filled up by seeing these women come in and grow their businesses. We share resources and, and sometimes even finances with these kinds of businesses and, and, and we're all stronger and better for it. So it's just a different game.

0 (1h 10m 15s):
You you've been quoted as saying that around 2014, the company had climbed out of a pretty, pretty significant downturn. And I'm assuming that that was probably connected to the recession, but you said that it was solely self-inflicted and I wonder, I mean, it sounds like there were, you know, maybe some, maybe some personnel decisions or strategic decisions led to some rough. Yeah.

2 (1h 10m 48s):
Yes. Very rough. You know, I was a kid, my something bad happened to somebody and a self-inflicted wound. And I talked to my mom about it and say, well, it was their own fault. And my mom would say, well, those are the worst kind. I mean, and I would say that I have a lifetime of the worst kind of wounds. Some of the biggest mistakes are people mistakes. And mostly they are my own failures and leadership that negatively impacted team members or the whole team and 20 14, 15, while it had its share of people, mistakes.

2 (1h 11m 32s):
I think it was really a failure on, on my part to recognize how quickly we needed to shift from a print and bricks and mortar model to a digital,

0 (1h 11m 44s):
To like social media marketing and things like influencers and things like that.

2 (1h 11m 48s):
Exactly. All of that. And it's, you know, I mean, it's one of those things where, you know, if a company has been around a long time, it, it has a legacy, you know, and that's a great thing, but it's also a challenging thing. I couldn't figure out how to rebuild the organization around digital. And I think I set the team up for maybe the only time in the history of the company where we were not all playing off the same sheet of music. There were folks who were very committed to the print model.

0 (1h 12m 22s):
You were still a catalog, primarily a catalog, and you can't see can't be today.

2 (1h 12m 27s):
Oh, it's just too late. No, we it's just, it's not happening. Don't get me wrong. Print is an awesome secret weapon to have they're they're a part of your marketing mix, but in 20 14, 20 15, yikes. I mean, maybe they were 80% of the marketing mix. Now when you consider our digital, you consider our retail prints. Only 30% of the marketing mix, you know, so a dramatic change in six years. But I remember talking to Dana at one point and I was like, you know, I think, I think we're going to have to take out a, a mortgage on the house. And I just need you to tell me that, that you're willing to go back to work.

0 (1h 13m 9s):
So you were, so you had really like the fortunes, the business had kind of reversed in a sense brutal. And, and, and it was, it was so revenue, sales, figures, everything was, was declining. Yup.

2 (1h 13m 22s):
And,

0 (1h 13m 23s):
And of course that's going to create stress.

2 (1h 13m 25s):
Yup. Yup. But in those moments, I mean, we have good people and I wish I could have been the coach that they needed me to be. And I think I'm getting better at it. I would say that the progress is slow, but I think, you know, the lessons that I have to learn now are the lessons of leadership more than they are entrepreneurship.

0 (1h 13m 51s):
Yeah. I guess the, those sort of that, that, unless it, dark days, it sounds too dramatic, but the kind of the downturn led you to eventually to, to bring on a new president of the company, Johnny Lynn, a man, and you had, for the most part, women executives was hiring Johnny and he's still, I believe still the president of the company. Yep. Did you have paused it anyway, a pause and say, wait, we're a women's apparel company. Is this the right fit?

2 (1h 14m 23s):
Oh, hell yeah. Yeah, yeah.

0 (1h 14m 29s):
I was trying to be gentle on the question, but yeah, thank you

2 (1h 14m 32s):
For being gentle, but hell yeah. You know, sometimes the right woman for the job as a man. And I think that with Johnny Lynn, he was just what I feel like every time we have had a president leading the business, they have been exactly what we needed at the time they came in, we needed a diversity of ideas about how to run this business. And Johnny is going to bring that to us. And he is such a good leader. And I felt confident knowing that I wasn't going to be leading the company on a daily basis, that the next person we needed to lead was someone who could build a great executive team.

2 (1h 15m 19s):
So they could lead long past when I'm here,

0 (1h 15m 23s):
You are a retail business. I think you have 14 or 15 stores. I think we have

2 (1h 15m 30s):
Like eight to

0 (1h 15m 31s):
18 stores and you kind of come out of this rough period and you're back to, you know, I think you hit hit a hundred million dollars and then COVID hits, which was absolutely devastating. Certainly initially for retail, you had to close all your stores. I think, I think store sales account for like 20% of your total business. And that was it. Zero, 0%. And that's a lot of money. I read that you guys had six weeks of cash in the bank in 20.

2 (1h 16m 11s):
Yeah. You know, we have to shut all of the stores. We have to shut our headquarters. And then probably the most challenging part for me was our distribution center, which like Amazon, because it's selling goods that are shipping directly home could remain open. And also if we shut that there is literally no cash. So shelter in place comes sales drop like a rock we're in the middle of what should have been our busiest season. We should have done about $10 million in sales.

2 (1h 16m 53s):
And we lost $5 million of sales in the last two weeks of March alone. We had six weeks of cash on hand.

0 (1h 17m 3s):
I mean, how long have, I mean, it was March and it was really traumatic. And I remember people were scrambling for PPP loans and I know you guys received one and it was a mess at the beginning. It was in may and figuring out how are we going to get one? And when did you start to see signs that sales were starting to pick up again?

2 (1h 17m 31s):
Well, I've been pushing for us to move from print to digital for like six years, but COVID pushed us probably as far as we'd been in six years in six months, everything moved digitally stuff that had been paper based was now online. So I really started first seeing the team just step up to the challenge of converting us to a fully, our accounting team went entirely paperless, which again, we've been pushing for our design team, presented all their decks online and then sales start to come back.

2 (1h 18m 10s):
Maybe in August or September. Of course we didn't recover the year. We ended up in negative territory, but I would say we made up a lot of ground on it so much so that by, I would say July, we felt confident everybody had taken a 25% or more pay cut. We're able to bring everybody back to full pay. And then we were also able to give back to people, the pay cuts they had taken.

0 (1h 18m 42s):
Wow. How have you, how has your business recovered now? Are you back to 2019 or even even higher levels now?

2 (1h 18m 51s):
Yes. So we are in the women's sports and fitness business, right? We sell workout gear and sweat pants and stuff to do outdoors. And people are doing that in droves. So retail is still coming back. Yeah. It's not quite there, but our direct, which were before COVID we were about 80% e-comm and 20% retail. Then we were a hundred percent e-comm and 0% retail. Now we've probably worked our way up to that 85% e-com and 15% retail, but a bigger number overall,

0 (1h 19m 33s):
Missy, you've been at this for 30 plus years. It's been, I know, incredibly fulfilling, but a crime. I mean, at some point, and I'm sure you've been approached in the past, but at some point there will be a moment where somebody, you know, says, Hey, we want to want to buy this. And you'll be in a position to decide whether to do that when, I mean, what do you think? I mean, at some point, do you think you would, you would entertain that

2 (1h 20m 5s):
Well, guy, you are asking me the question that the accountants and the lawyers have been asking me since day one, what is the exit strategy,

0 (1h 20m 16s):
Right. Which you don't have to answer because it's your company.

2 (1h 20m 19s):
No, I think it's, I think I'm coming more to what the exit strategy is as I, I, you know, I couldn't have answered it. It's important. It's absolutely incumbent upon me to be able to answer that question. If I want title nine to outlast this generation of leaders, I need to be able to answer that question. And the thing that I know is that my goal is to get it in the hand of the next generation of female owner operators. I do not need a liquidity event because of the way we have grown it. At this point, we have zero debt. We have zero outside investors.

2 (1h 21m 0s):
So it is a good spot for someone to come in and be able to earn a seat at the ownership table. And that is my hope is that at some point over the next 10 to 15 years, I'll be able to pass title nine on to the next group of owner-operators, who I hope will do it a whole heck of a lot better than I have. So I am not thinking actively about an exit strategy. I am thinking actively about leadership succession. Yep. Fair enough,

0 (1h 21m 39s):
Missy, when you think about, you know, this, this whole journey where you've gotten to, cause I mean, you had a really tough few years and then there was, you know, kind of stability and growth and the brick and mortar, and then this period of stagnation and then growth again. And then the pandemic, which was of course probably the most trying time of your entire tenure. And once again, you know, growth, D did you, I mean, just reflecting on that, I mean, did you ever, could you ever have imagined when you started this in the garage and in 89 as a 26, 27 year old, that 30 plus years on it would look something like this was that, could you have envisioned that?

2 (1h 22m 26s):
I want to say no. And I want to say maybe a little bit yes. And only the sort of frivolous way that a 20 year old might like, we need to start the women's version of Nike, you know? And then once I got around to it, no, I don't think I ever could have envisioned what the work has become and the people right. That I've gotten to work with. I'm not sure. I really had expectations, to be honest, I was like, this is going to be a fun adventure. And I think that's really, when I think about business, it's the great game of business.

2 (1h 23m 8s):
Yeah. You know, we're not curing cancer guy. I mean, so it can, it can be fun. There can be times when it is hard and you take your losses, but it's a great game and it's been a great adventure. So I hope I have a few more adventures left in me.

0 (1h 23m 25s):
How much do you attribute your success to, to the Porky put in the really hard work you put in how much it has to do with luck. I mean, you had some lucky breaks early on and I mean, of course, meeting Dana and I, who helped you kind of like learn about the bike business and then, and then north face and meeting the right people at the right time. But also obviously there was a grind there too. So yeah. How much of those things do you, would you attribute to the success of the business?

2 (1h 23m 57s):
Yeah. Right. It's percentages. It's not binary. It's not all luck or all hard work it's it's percentages. And I think, you know, if you want to talk about the luckiest things that probably had sort of the absolutely necessary parts of it, I had to be a young woman growing up in the seventies and eighties, not in the forties and fifties that's luck. I probably had to grow up in a family that was encouraging me to be an entrepreneur, even though that might not be something young women in the south did at the time that's luck. I had to grow up and not be battling abject poverty.

2 (1h 24m 38s):
Yeah. That's luck. So when you look at all of those very lucky things, and then you add on to it, all of the things, the happenstance meetings and the people that offered me a hand up, I mean, I'd say it's 90% luck. But then what I would say is the part that I can control is the 10% that's work. And so it may only be 10%, but I'm going to work as hard as I can to control that 10%.

0 (1h 25m 8s):
That's Missy park, founder, CEO of title nine, by the way, earlier this year, the company wrote the biggest check in its 32 year history, $1 million to the us women's national soccer team just to pay their players more money. So they'd get a little closer to making what the male soccer players make. And this wasn't for a fancy sponsorship deal or anything like that. It was just a straight up gift.

2 (1h 25m 38s):
Great. Pass-through to the players. We're not asking. I don't want, I, I said like, I don't want to have a beer with the us women's national soccer team. I honestly,

0 (1h 25m 48s):
This I'm sure they would buy you a beer though.

2 (1h 25m 50s):
They might buy me

0 (1h 25m 51s):
Up in here.

2 (1h 25m 53s):
I do have a Budweiser beer glass with Megan Rapinoe on it. I think that'll do so. It's kind of like I'm having to deal with her.

0 (1h 26m 2s):
Hey, thanks so much listening to the show this week. If you're not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe or follow us wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us or email addresses H ibt@npr.org, if you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or my account at guy Roz. You can find us on Instagram at how I built this NPR or at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by REM teen era bluey. It was edited by NEPA grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Julia Carney, Elena coats, Farah safari, Liz Metzger, and Harrison BJ Choi.

0 (1h 26m 43s):
Our intern is Katie cipher. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer I'm guy Raz, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

3 (1h 27m 5s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy, flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

6 (1h 27m 26s):
We live in a world, a country, and a moment in time where there's so much important news and it is constantly changing. That's why up first is here for you. It's NPRs daily morning news podcast. In about 10 minutes, you can start your day informed, listen to up first on the NPR one app or wherever you get your podcasts.