0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
Think of all the things you can do in 10 minutes or less. Scroll through social media. Check your bank balance, make a sandwich, or learn about the surprising economics behind all these things. The indicated from Planet Money is a quick hit of insight into the economics of business, work, and everyday life. Every weekday in less than 10 minutes. Listen now to The Indicator Podcast from npr.

0 (31s):
How I Built This is pleased to have Upwork as our presenting sponsor. Visit upwork.com to get hiring. Upwork has a message for you, everything you know about business, it was made up by a bunch of guys a hundred years ago. Don't stay bound to their antiquated rules like the nine to five workday commuting to an empty office building, or only hiring full-timers. Embrace a new way of working with Upwork. It's a portal to the future of business and it's disguised as a website. Go to upwork.com. There you'll see the light. And also find talent for projects of any size. From simple deliverables to complex projects. From short-term help to full-time hires, you can finally let those old business titans and their tired ideas rest in peace.

0 (1m 14s):
This is how we work now. Visit upwork.com to get hiring talented professionals today. Workforce challenges, supply chain hiccups, digital finance. There's no shortage of volatility in business today, but volatility isn't the problem. Doing nothing is Crow believes that within all these challenges lie hidden opportunities and better ways of doing things. With specialized experience in audit, tax, advisory and consulting, Crow can help you embrace volatility in today's economy. Visit embrace volatility.com to see how Crow can work with you. Once again, that's embrace volatility.com.

0 (1m 58s):
Hey, it's guy here. You know, we hear a lot of stories on how I built this about facing hurdles, overcoming obstacles, and being told no again and again and again. I recently talked with Country Music superstar, Shanaya Twain, and she shared some pretty candid and surprising insights on how she is a female performer from Canada had to make some pretty bold moves to break into the male dominated world of country music in Nashville. You should definitely check out my interview with Shania Twain on my other podcast. The Great Creators just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. And now on today's show,

3 (2m 46s):
I never slept. I was working outta my apartment for the first two years. We didn't have an office, so it was doing everything in our kitchen or in our living room. It was taking my kids to school and then getting on the phone until four in the morning falling asleep on the phone. Yeah, it was the most exhausting year. And following by 18 other years.

0 (3m 18s):
Welcome to How I Built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Tori Burge wanted to revive a former fashion label, was told no. So she launched her own and grew it into a global brand with 370 stores around the world. When Tory Burch launched her fashion brand in the early two thousands, there were a lot of people who wrote her off. The perception, at least at the time, was that this was a vanity project from a so-called socialite.

0 (4m 3s):
Tori had been an influential executive at Ralph Lauren, Vera Wang, and L V M H. She would sometimes appear in glossy magazines at fancy parties in New York City. But being well connected isn't enough, especially when you're building a consumer brand because at the end of the day, consumers have to like what you sell. And 20 years later, Tori Birch is one of the most enduring fashion brands in the world, a company that is worth billions of dollars. And one of the reasons for the brand's success is its point of view. Tori wanted to create clothing and accessories that were timeless and beautifully designed, but that lived in that zone of aspirational affordability.

0 (4m 47s):
So shoes, for example, that might look like they cost a thousand dollars, but were priced closer to 300. The road to taking Tory Burch from a single boutique in New York to hundreds of stores around the world was fraught almost from the beginning. Within two years of launching, she and her husband and business partner Chris Birch, divorced. Their split and subsequent legal battles became fodder for the tabloid press. But remarkably, the two of them ended up resolving their differences. And through it all, Tori figured out how to compartmentalize the drama happening behind the scenes and still grow the brand.

0 (5m 29s):
Tori Burch grew up in a sprawling 250 year old farmhouse, about 30 minutes outside of Philadelphia. She came from a blended family with three brothers. Her mom was an aspiring actress and model, and her dad,

3 (5m 43s):
He was the most extraordinary man. I mean, definitely known for his style and quick wit, his humor was hysterical and he was like the king of one-liners, but he was definitely more of an introvert. And I remember always just saying, I love you. And getting him to say, I love you. And he was just the kindest person you could ever meet.

0 (6m 9s):
Did, did he, what did he do for a living?

3 (6m 11s):
So, you know, it's funny. I mean, he never really worked. And so when you had to fill out those little things in school that, what did your father do? I, I never really knew what to write, so I, I would write investor or I wasn't really quite sure what to write, but in a way it was interesting. He was like a Bon v vo, but he was much deeper than that. But he spent a lot of time traveling and spent a lot of time in Europe. And I used to have books of the women he dated and he finally met my mom and fell in love. I I don't think they got married until he was 40 years old. And so back then, that was pretty ancient.

0 (6m 50s):
So he was, I mean he was like, from, from what you described, from what, what I've read, he was almost like a, I mean

3 (6m 57s):
A

0 (6m 57s):
Dandy a dandy, right? Like you, I I think you described him wearing espd drills and pink shirts sitting on a tractor.

3 (7m 5s):
Well, yeah. I mean, I just have this vivid memory of him on this giant tractor and listening to sport games and always just perfectly dressed and in a way he should have been a designer because he had all of his clothing made and it was just incredible detailing mu much of which I've used for inspiration in, in a lot of the things we've made over the years.

0 (7m 26s):
And, and were you like as a, as a, as a girl, you know, and forgive me for using this term cuz it's lazy and kind of just shorthand, but were you like a, a girly girl or, or were you into sort of stereotypical girl things like Not

3 (7m 42s):
At all. Not even the slightest. I was a complete tomboy. I was constantly climbing trees and trying to keep up with my brothers. So I, I don't think I put a dress on until I was later in high school. I remember, you know, when I was young I had no choice. But I remember coming, actually my dad took me one day to the barber, then I finally had gotten long hair. I grew, I was, I was born bald and my dad took me to the barber and I got a cut. And my mom was so furious because I looked literally like a boy.

0 (8m 19s):
Hmm. I I know that, that when you got older, you went to, to college at, at University of Pennsylvania. Yeah. Where I guess you, you studied art history and when you graduated, did you, like, is that what you wanna do or were you interested in, in fashion or, or, or what

3 (8m 37s):
I was, you know, in the college was like the most fun and, and I was thinking of all kinds of different things and then I realized I needed to get a job and it was the sense of urgency. I'm, I I, I'm not as sure that happens today, but back then it was everyone needed to work Yeah. Right away. And we needed to figure it out. And, and so I sent about 50 resumes to people and, and you know, my sister-in-law was in fashion. She had worked at Calvin Klein and, and my mom wore this designer zen. And so I sent a note to him.

0 (9m 12s):
He was like a, a small designer in New York City.

3 (9m 15s):
He was small but incredibly cool. He was known as like this extraordinary minimalist and didn't use zippers or buttons and it was all about the fabric and the drape.

0 (9m 25s):
And he had a boutique in, in the city.

3 (9m 28s):
He did not have a boutique. He sold wholesale and he sold out of his showroom. Got it. Which is where I ended up getting a job. And he basically told me that I could have a job if I came to work that next week, which was literally almost a week after graduation. So I, within that week, had to find an apartment and moved to New York and I moved with two of my roommates and we lived in a one bedroom with three girls and Tribeca.

0 (9m 57s):
And what was your job? I mean like was it substantive work? Was it fetching coffee? What

3 (10m 3s):
It was anything that he needed done it, the it, so basically you walked into his office slash showroom and he was this, this man that looked like Rasputin and the vodka would start at 10 in the morning and, and we would, whether I was pouring his vodka or getting coffee or or running interferences if he didn't wanna see people. But I was setting up meetings with editors and I was like taking notes. I was sending shipments, I was doing anything that needed to be done.

0 (10m 36s):
And it was just, he's known as Zen.

3 (10m 39s):
Zen

0 (10m 40s):
Like Pele or Madonna.

3 (10m 42s):
Exactly. And he would dress everyone from Isabel Rini to Wow. I mean everyone chic and beautiful. And it was an amazing induction into the fashion world.

0 (10m 56s):
And, and I mean, so you kind of fell into the fashion world. It wasn't like you were seeking this out, it was like you had to fight a job and there was this opportunity to work for and then that kind of got you into the fashion world, but but it wasn't necessarily like your plan?

3 (11m 11s):
No, it wasn't my plan. I mean, that said, in re like thinking about it, I was immersed in fashion my whole childhood between my mom and my dad and just watching them, not partaking per se, but I never really thought that would be my plan.

0 (11m 28s):
Did you have a fashion like sensibility as a young woman? Like did you, was it something you were really into or you into clothes and

3 (11m 37s):
It's funny, I guess I had my own style because I was always made fun of at Penn and I always loved vintage also. Yeah. That was something. And, and so I would wear like Grateful Dead t-shirts and an Air Miss scarf and LL Bean boots and I kind of had uniforms and I remember my friend Patrick used to say, call me proc. And it was because it was like this look of like sort of a bit preppy and a bit of a jock. And so, so I guess I stood out a bit. Hmm.

0 (12m 9s):
And, and, and I guess you, you went on to have eventually a few more jobs in the fashion world. You were, for a while you were an assistant at Harper's Bazaar, the magazine. And then, and then you went to work for Ralph Lauren to do I think PR for them. Right?

3 (12m 24s):
Right. So I went to Ralph Lauren. It was a very glamorous job in a closet managing samples. And it was really there that I was exposed to so many different parts of his brand. And you know, it's funny, I, when I was thinking about this interview while I was at Ralph, there was one time that I tried to work in design and, and submitted a project and I was turned down and I'll never, I hadn't, I don't think I've ever told anyone that I was, but I really, I guess at the time was interested in design or at least became interested cuz I was at Ralph for, for a while.

0 (13m 5s):
There's, there's this like, this kind of caricature, right, of what it's like to work at a fashion house, right? And, and you know, comes from media and films and the Devil West Prada and what whatever it might be, right? And I mean, you were in your early twenties in New York, this is the early nineties, it's like, you know, and Ralph Lauren really, he's kind of the og, right? He's the guy who, you know, we had Michael Kors on the show a while back and he talked about Ralph Lauren, how he really looked to Ralph Lauren as a model for what, you know, eventually he would do. Did you, what was the atmosphere and the environment like? Was it cutthroat? Was it cruel? Were people mean and what do you remember?

3 (13m 47s):
I mean, I didn't find that at all. I thought it was spectacular and you go and you dream and so, but it was interesting because I, I used to have this joke, I don't know if you'd think it was funny, but I called them Polo Krishnas, all of us. Cuz everyone was dressed head to toe Ralph. And it was like you, you had to eat and drink and breathe Ralph in, in a cool way. And I just thought that that was fascinating and I loved my boss and she's still there. People Wow. Stay for forever there. Mary Randolph Carter. Wow. When you meet Mary around Duff Carter, she looks quintessentially like a Ralph model. She's stunning.

0 (14m 28s):
Did you, I mean you, you, you'd mentioned that you had submitted some designs when you worked at Ralph Lauren, which didn't go anywhere. They, they kind of didn't really, it

3 (14m 36s):
Was a project. Yeah,

0 (14m 37s):
Yeah. I mean, did you hold onto that kind of dream of maybe doing design work or, or did you kind of give that up at the time? I

3 (14m 45s):
Sort of gave it up at the time and I didn't really think a lot about it. You know, I was thinking a lot about just how I became a designer and with my love of vintage and my mother's clothing. I used to remake clothing all the time with a tailor. Oh, you,

0 (15m 2s):
You bring her stuff to a tailor.

3 (15m 4s):
I would bring her stuff or find stuff vintage and remake it. I mean, even in college, I even remember in high school we had a uniform, but I was always wearing like boxer shorts and getting in trouble underneath my uniform and like adding patches and I was always, you know, doing things like that. But I never really, never really registered.

0 (15m 23s):
Did you sew?

3 (15m 25s):
No. I mean, very, very badly.

0 (15m 31s):
All right, so meanwhile you, you, you end up doing a, a few different jobs in fashion. I think in the mid, in the mid nineties you got a job doing a PR at Vera Wang, and then a couple years later you, you left to go work for LV m h to doing PR for one of their brands, which is the, the luxury brand. Ve And also I guess during this period you meet someone who's going to become very important to your life. Who, who is Chris Birch. How did you meet Chris?

3 (16m 3s):
He had an office in the same building and then we met in the elevator and he, he laughs but my sister-in-law said if there were 10,000 people in the room, he'd be the last person that she thought I would date. And he, he repeats that story so I can

0 (16m 21s):
And he was old. He is older than you. Yep. And so you, the two of you started dating and then you got married, you became Tori Birch in 1996. Yes.

3 (16m 33s):
Yes I did. I fell in love with his three little girls. He, aside from him, but I, he had three little girls that were five, seven, and eight at the time. Wow.

0 (16m 45s):
And and what, what was he, I mean what, who, who was Chris Birch? What was he

3 (16m 50s):
He doing? I mean he was this incredible entrepreneur and still is. And he built this company called Eagle's Eye with his brother. And it was a very big company for Philadelphia. It was like the sort of preppy company. It was sort of novelty sweaters and Christmas sweaters. I don't know if you remember turtlenecks with embroidered whales on it or lady bugs. And so he built this company, like from college he started to travel to Asia and he was one of the first people to really do production over there. And he, he and his brother Bob just build a pretty terrific company.

0 (17m 34s):
So you guys get married in 1996 and you become Tory Robinson Birch I think, right?

3 (17m 40s):
Yes.

0 (17m 41s):
And you, I think pretty soon, relatively soon after you had, you had two boys twins. So you guys had, within a year you had a pretty big blended family. He had three daughters and now have five children. Yeah, I need five children at the house and a pretty busy job. I mean, working for L V M H, so there's a lot going on. And I guess eventually they offered you a pretty big job there. They

3 (18m 7s):
Offered me a big, a bigger job because they were looking for a head of us,

0 (18m 13s):
Head of us

3 (18m 14s):
For Leve. And I, I also found out I was pregnant with my third son.

0 (18m 21s):
Wow.

3 (18m 21s):
So I realized that three babies under the age of four was a little too much to have a career at the same time. And it was a very tough decision to leave a career that I loved and essentially become a stay-at-home mom.

0 (18m 39s):
So when you, when you decided to leave and what, what, tell me a little bit about what that meant in your life. It's the early two thousands, you, you know, now have got kind of six kids under your roof. But did you think that you, I mean, do you remember thinking, I probably won't go back into, into a corporate job?

3 (19m 6s):
Well, I had so many ideas to start different companies during that time and just, I, I guess I was trying to find my way and I was trying all different things and, and the one thing that I realized is that I didn't wanna keep talking about things to friends and people until it was real. Yeah. I was getting tired of the ideas because I would talk about them and then nothing would come to fruition. And

0 (19m 31s):
What do, what do you mean you had ideas? I mean you

3 (19m 34s):
Like I was just interested it could have been like there was a baby contraption. I mean there were, there was a lot. I mean I also had an idea to start a school, a charter school because it was hard to get, you know, children into schools. Yeah. And I felt like there was a big need in, in New York City. So it wasn't always around fashion, it was, you know, it was also right at the time when I was moving down to Philadelphia, my dad wasn't a hun. A hundred percent. Well I had all of these things happening at once and I kind of knew that I wanted to start a company and I also knew that I wanted to start a foundation one day.

3 (20m 14s):
So I had this instinct that, that if I could build something big, I could also then have the financials to invest into a foundation.

0 (20m 27s):
Just the idea of wanting to start a company. Where do you think that came from? Is that something that you think you always had like a seed inside of you of like, that you always somehow thought maybe you would do that? Or is it something that started to emerge after you got more experience as a, you know,

3 (20m 45s):
I think it, it came with more experience. I, I really don't think it was, you know, something that I had planned. Certainly I never planned to be a designer, but I, I think it came with really learning so much from all the different places that I had worked.

0 (21m 2s):
You, you came to this state of mind, this, this place with, I guess with a sense of confidence that maybe you could do this, you could actually start a business.

3 (21m 13s):
Well maybe it's because I really didn't know what I was embarking on. Cause I literally hear myself and think back on some of the conversations I had. And it's slightly embarrassing. I mean, I, I said I wanted to start a global lifestyle brand so that I could start a foundation. And had I known what, what that would mean and take, I probably would've been a little more careful in the words I used. Yeah. I always l you know, there's certain things where you're, my parents always say your own worst enemy. Like you can be more confident at times and and feel less at others. So, and maybe also hearing, you know, about what Chris had worked on at Eagle's Eye, I think he had the ability to make product and so that was interesting for me.

0 (22m 6s):
Alright, so you are thinking through a bunch of different ideas and you kind of land on this idea that there's a gap in the market. There's not that like attainable luxury clothing, apparel is not, there's, there's an opportunity there that either yeah, you had to spend thousands and thousands of dollars or you had to go to like, you know, fast fashion, but your, you felt like there was an opportunity to, to create sort of luxury apparel, but not at luxury prices.

3 (22m 40s):
Yeah, I, I did feel that there was nothing in between. I felt at the time there was the gap in Banana Republic. Yeah. And then there was Calvin Klein and, and Ralph Lauren, you know, so, which

0 (22m 52s):
Was true in, in the, in the late nineties, early two thousands,

3 (22m 54s):
There was not, yeah. There, there really wasn't the, and sort of, I also felt luxury was not necessarily about a price point. And for me it was, I was always taught through my mom, the, and dad that it was really about emotion and how something makes you feel and time. And I just had a different perspective on what luxury meant. And I would watch my mom get dressed and put on this gold le or an outfit and she'd come and just, it was like this, like awakening and she'd be so lively and and energetic and she, she loved fashion. And so it just was an interesting way to think about it is how fashion can change the way you feel about yourself.

0 (23m 40s):
So you left LVMH in 2001 and you wouldn't launch Tory Birch until 2004. So let, let me talk, let's talk about the time in between for a moment. When you, this idea is starting to coalesce in your mind, there's an, there's a gap here and I think I can come up with something to fill that gap. And when you went to Chris who, you know, had experience in, in, in the apparel business and as did you, but when you went to him and you sort of talked to him about this idea, what was his response?

3 (24m 9s):
I mean, he liked the idea. I also had a friend, Fiona Kotor, who worked at Ralph with me, and she worked in design and she also was part of the conversation because I, I wanted to start a business with her. We had talked about it. And so she also had a bit of experience more, more than I did around the product and the actual design process. So in, in a way she really helped me learn about that in the beginning. And, and Chris really liked the idea. I think he, in a w he had sold eagle's eye and in a way he probably missed that, the business because he was very passionate about it.

3 (24m 51s):
So he really did like the idea of us starting something.

0 (24m 55s):
And you knew, I mean, you, you kind of imagine you knew what you were going for. I mean, you had worked at Ralph Lauren, you'd worked with Vera Wang at L V M H, like you, so you knew kind of what attainable luxury meant in, in, in your life.

3 (25m 11s):
Well, I had an idea. I mean, I sort of, you know, put these books together of what I thought it could be.

0 (25m 19s):
What what, what do you, what, what were the books? What was that like, like a mood board of like different images or things that you had sketched or?

3 (25m 26s):
Yeah, it was all of the above. Yeah. It was old pictures of my parents from the sixties and seventies. It was images of a ballet flat from Audrey Hepburn. It was a company my mom wore called Jax. That was what I really wanted to do is relaunch Jax. That was, that was really what my first idea was, is to bring Jax back. And Jax was this great brand that all these various stylish women wore. It was designed by Rudy Ginwright and it was in the sixties and seventies. My mom wore it and it was the perfect cigarette pan. It was the perfect peco, it was the perfect gingham dress.

3 (26m 8s):
And so we ended up going down to New Jersey to someone who had a ton of archives. And because

0 (26m 16s):
Jax was no longer in business,

3 (26m 17s):
Jax was no longer, it had gone out of business. And so I was, you know, really excited about this idea. And then I called Sally Hansen, who was probably 90 at the time. I got in touch with her.

0 (26m 30s):
And Sally Hansen was the, she

3 (26m 32s):
Was the founder.

0 (26m 33s):
The founder, okay. Yeah.

3 (26m 34s):
And the owner of the intellectual property. So yeah. So

0 (26m 37s):
You, you were thinking, oh well let's buy this brand and relaunch it.

3 (26m 41s):
Yes. Yeah. And so I got her on the phone and literally it was such a shutdown within 20 seconds, she basically said, absolutely not. Wow. And so it was like, whoa. I had done so much work on it, I had called different people, so then I had to regroup.

0 (27m 1s):
So she wouldn't sell it to you and No. And, but, but your first step really in thinking of a concept was to build the, this like brand bible. This, this book.

3 (27m 10s):
Yes. Yes.

0 (27m 11s):
Just the pictures. Your mom, like pictures,

3 (27m 14s):
Sketches and old, old things by Jax, but other things as well. It could have been vintage, it was, you know, pictures of Steve McQueen and, and different men that looked chic. It was kind of just an image board and, and, but it was books and books. It wasn't a board, but it was like the, the beginning of what I thought, you know, what became the company.

2 (27m 39s):
When

0 (27m 39s):
We come back in just a moment, Tori launches a website, opens our first store and wrestles with a loaded word. Ambitious. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. Hey, I've got a quick request for all of you. Could you let me know the very first time you discovered how I built this and what kept you coming back for more? You can add your answers to the How I built this community Miro board. It's super easy.

0 (28m 19s):
Just head on over to miro.com/built. That's m i r o.com/built. And I can't wait to read your responses. Miro is actually sponsoring this episode, and if you haven't heard of Miro, it's the most incredible visual collaboration tool. It basically serves as your team's online workspace becoming a canvas where you can build on each other's ideas and create something great together from anywhere. While you are leaving us your answers, feel free to play around with Miro. You can pick from thousands of templates to get started, like a quick brainstorm, an icebreaker or a flowchart. Our team loves Miros mind map for thinking about future episodes. I look forward to seeing what you will add to our board.

0 (28m 60s):
Go to miro.com/built to leave your thoughts with sticky notes, comments, reactions, and more. That's miro.com/built miro.com/built.

4 (29m 13s):
It's summertime. Why not celebrate With a sweet slice of happiness, there is nothing like a sweet and juicy slice of watermelon. And while everybody knows that watermelons are delicious, many don't know they're healthy too. Watermelons are fat free and packed with vitamins A, b, six and c plus. They're super hydrating because they're 92% water Florida Watermelons are grown by family farmers who dedicate their lives to growing quality produce for you. When you purchase a Florida grown watermelon at your local grocery store, you're not only buying American produce, but also supporting family farmers. Pick up a Florida grown watermelon at your grocery store today.

0 (29m 56s):
One more thing before we get back to the show. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to how I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the early two thousands and Tori's idea for reviving the fashion brand. Jax has gotten a flat no from the founder, so she's trying to figure out what to do next.

3 (30m 29s):
I regrouped and thought, okay, we can do this without using Jax, but it was still kind of a similar idea in that it was these classic pieces that were incredibly hard to find and beautifully made. And that was a different price point than what you might find at Valentino or ysl. So it, for me it was like, how do we really think about quality and look through a luxury lens, but offer something that can reach more customers? And and it was the beginning of this concept of a, of a retail store and this idea of direct to consumer, which was also the opposite of what I was told to do at the time.

0 (31m 17s):
So, so in that period of time, from, from like concept to launch, right, you started to talk to people, you partnered up with some f with some former colleagues and I guess you even brought in some designers to help you kind of sketch out designs of of what? Of dresses, of tops, of tunics, of it was

3 (31m 38s):
Everything. I mean literally it was about maybe nine to 11 different categories, whether it was footwear, handbags, swim, ready to wear, eyewear, it was jewelry. So I really thought about everything in these image books about sort of what would be interesting to have my take on it. And so I think it was just about women and, and they were becoming more and more busy and they wanted to look chic and I wanted to be a problem solver. A lot of women struggled with how do you put certain things together? How do I wear color, how do I print?

3 (32m 18s):
I always heard that in everywhere I worked. How, how do you know women didn't always have the confidence And I kind of was thinking like, how do you be irreverent and interesting but still be classic in spirit? And those were some of the things I thought about.

0 (32m 35s):
So at what point did, were you comfortable to sort of pull the trigger and say, let's do this, let's, let's start to bring some money in?

3 (32m 44s):
So I remember it, it was really around 2003 when I decided that I wanted to start something and it was a year of very intense everything to get the idea of the company together.

0 (33m 3s):
So you needed to obviously raise some money and I know that you and Chris put in some money as well, but, but starting a fashion brand is not, I mean it's it's hard I think to do it with a hundred thousand bucks. Like you need significant cash to do it. Yeah,

3 (33m 19s):
Yeah. I mean, Chris and I put in $2 million and we also were funding the, the beginnings of it. And that was everything from the branding. We worked with a company called MoCo to work on our logo and to actual setting up the production in Hong Kong. And Chris had experience with that. We set up our Hong Kong office at, before anything.

0 (33m 49s):
Let, let me kind of ask you about the, the logo, which is, which is now kind of iconic two Ts, right? Was that, I mean, tell me about that logo, how did that was, was that the logo from the very beginning?

3 (34m 7s):
So yes, I met with this branding company called Monko and I said, you know, I wanted to create a logo that we could use in different ways and I was really interested in Morocco. My parents had spent their honeymoon and then just constantly went back. And then also David Hicks, who was an interior designer that I'd always loved and my parents loved. And so I thought there was something interesting that we could combine and that it would be more of a design element. And they came back with different iterations but many different iterations and they came up with this one and it was the one that I loved and it was the first one that I had an emotional connection too.

3 (34m 52s):
And I, I would say that wasn't the case for everyone. It was, it was polarizing. Yeah. And people either loved it or they didn't. And I really loved it.

0 (35m 1s):
Yeah, cuz you can, you can, I mean probably people said, oh, it looks like an, like an Iron Cross or something like that, you

3 (35m 7s):
Know, we got the cross, we got it looked, it looked Asian, it looked, it looked Barack, it looked, you know, everyone had a different opinion.

0 (35m 17s):
And did you ask yourself at the time, like, because it's such an iconic logo today, but you, you couldn't have known that in 2003 while you were designing it, but did you, were you, were you ever sort of asking the question like, Hey, if we just put this logo on a sticker, we want people to know what this is? Was that

3 (35m 37s):
I wasn't thinking about it that way. I wasn't thinking like, what is our logo and the way, what's

0 (35m 42s):
Your Nike

3 (35m 43s):
Today? Right? Yeah. It wasn't, it wasn't like that at the time.

0 (35m 46s):
It was just you liked it. It was,

3 (35m 48s):
I liked it and I felt that it was like, I felt it was impactful and strong and you know, I had spent some time studying Chinese art and it reminded me of like never ending the circle. And it was, it just felt vibrant.

0 (36m 4s):
All right, so you have the logo and you decide that Hong Kong is really the best place for you to, to, to set up manufacturing because Hong Kong obviously tailoring textile center for a long time. And so from that base you could basically establish relationships.

3 (36m 22s):
Well, I went and I met with factories and back then to ask a factory to make 50 or a hundred pieces of something was not that interesting for them. Yeah. So they had to, I think going there personally made all the difference and showing them that if they took a chance on us, that we would stay with them and partner with us, that we would grow with them. So it was a lot of long dinners, a lot of long conversations. And I think also Chris's experience of building a brand absolutely helped as well.

0 (36m 60s):
And this from the beginning was going to be a fashion brand, but that was also a retail location. You were not, it wasn't like you were gonna build a brand and sell it to, you know, Bloomingdale's and

3 (37m 13s):
No, you know, in fact I was not thinking about wholesale at all in the beginning. I was really interested in direct to consumer and I really felt that e-commerce at some point would be worth it. Yeah. And it was also a way that we could reach more people.

0 (37m 32s):
But I mean, because of your experience working in the industry, I mean, you, you could have had far faster distribution if you, if you Right. If you had designed a line and then went and talked to a bunch of buyers. Yes. Yes. And that could have been a faster way to get your, your brand out into the world.

3 (37m 53s):
Well, I, I think that's sort of a message about our whole company. We've never wanted to take the fast way. We've always wanted to be a patient brand, even from the very beginning. I've never been inspired by becoming the biggest brand. I wanted to be the most extraordinary brand.

0 (38m 14s):
What about the name of the company? I mean, originally it was not called Tory Burch, right? No.

3 (38m 19s):
Well, I didn't wanna use my name and I tried to get, I, I wish I could remember maybe 10 names and all of them were taken or unavailable in some way. And, and so I, I thought Tori by t r b, it's, in retrospect it was such a bad name, but that's what we, we ended up using. And I think it was probably a year and a half into it, or maybe two years into it that I ended up changing it

0 (38m 49s):
To Tori Birch.

3 (38m 50s):
Yes.

0 (38m 51s):
And so just to kind of, I mean just, I'm, I'm imagining this, I mean all you, you really did a lot of work before. I mean, you laid the groundwork, you had, you set up a shop, an office in Hong Kong, you had a logo, a name, and then a product line. And so what, yeah, tell me about that product line.

3 (39m 11s):
So we were designing different products and I was really interested in sweaters. And we had ready to wear, we had the peco, the concept of the perfect pant. We had the kaftan, I had found a vintage tunic in a Paris flea market for about $8. That became one of the core pieces of our collection. We had a fair amount of my mom's clothing that I was inspired by. And we had totes, we had swim, we had esp beryls.

0 (39m 46s):
And you would have them, you would have, so you had a lot of products. I mean, you had, you had a bunch of things in, in a lot of different sizes.

3 (39m 54s):
We did. I wouldn't say we had a tremendous amount of inventory, but we, we had, we had what we needed. Hmm.

0 (40m 3s):
And, and, and you were gonna be selling things online, which, which was kind of rare at the time, but, but you were, you were also going to open a physical store, right? Like a, a retail location Yeah. In New York. So, so tell me about that first store.

3 (40m 16s):
So we found a location where the rent was very inexpensive and that was Elizabeth Street in

0 (40m 22s):
Tribeca.

3 (40m 23s):
In Tribeca. There was nothing on the street at the time. There was Cafe Havana and maybe a couple stores. And the store we ended up taking was a furniture store.

0 (40m 33s):
So you opened the store February, 2004 in, in Tribeca During Fashion

3 (40m 40s):
Week? Yep.

0 (40m 41s):
During fashion week. And, and what did, I mean creating a tangible luxury, did it mean, I mean, cuz a lot of what makes something luxury is in the design, right? And how it's designed and how people perceive that design. But were you able to create that, those luxury products because your manufacturing costs were lower because they were being made in Asia?

3 (41m 6s):
Well, I think so. I think we were pushing the limit there and, and we, first of all, I had met just some different designers, so the attention to detail and design was there and the quality was incredibly beautiful. I think I've learned a lot about design. I would say the pieces were at the time great and they stood out and different. But as I've learned to become a designer over her time, you know, it, it's, it was the first collection.

0 (41m 41s):
Alright, so that store opens and, and it's a, it's a, it's a hit. I mean, you sell everything out in the first, first couple days. And there, I guess around that time the New York Times wrote, it's a piece about she's the first time they had written a piece about the brand and they called you ambitious. And that apparently really bothered you.

3 (42m 0s):
Well, it bothered me in the way that it was asked. It was not, it was, it was asked in a way that at the time I sort of was put off by that question and I just felt like it was kind of a rude question.

0 (42m 14s):
You thought the concept or the notion of being ambitious was,

3 (42m 17s):
You know, distasteful for women.

0 (42m 20s):
You felt that way? Well that was how you were programmed to think.

3 (42m 23s):
I think we, I think it was, it was in the ether that way back then that it was okay for men to be ambitious but not okay for women. And I got a phone call from a friend of mine in business and it was until she mentioned it to me that I should embrace the word ambition and not shy away from it. It never occurred to me. And as soon as I heard it put that way, it struck me as something that I wanted to change and wanted to correct in myself because I also shied away from that word. And I wasn't embracing my own ambition and I wasn't, I was, I wasn't saying thank you.

3 (43m 7s):
Yes. I am ambitious. Yeah, yeah,

0 (43m 9s):
Yeah. And I mean, I mean, ambition is obviously a, a critical element of, of building a, a company and a brand. And so let me ask you about ambition in 2004 when you opened that shop and, and you talked about to, to maybe people you really trusted about what it could be. What did you imagine in 2004?

3 (43m 33s):
Well, I, I imagined something big and I don't know why, but I felt that I wanted to create a company that reached a lot of women and, and I wanted to build something globally. Hmm. But it was pretty frenetic. It was, you know, a lot of just moving in all directions and just trying to keep up. I never slept. Yeah. And it was being a mom, I was working outta my apartment for the first two years. We didn't have an office, so it was doing everything in our kitchen or in our living room.

3 (44m 18s):
It was taking my kids to school and then getting on the phone until four in the morning falling asleep on the phone. You know, we ended up having maybe 14 or 15 people working out of our apartment. So I was also contacted from the first day by Bergdorf Goodman by, they wanted

0 (44m 39s):
To buy,

3 (44m 40s):
They wanted to buy. And so they came into my apartment to see the two racks and, and the accessories. And, and, and that was the beginning of our wholesale collection. It was, it was the most exhausting year and, and following by 18 other years. But it's, it was, it was crazy. And it was a whirlwind.

0 (45m 5s):
You got a pretty awesome opportunity a year in when Oprah called, or Oprah's producers called to, to be on for the next big thing that she was doing on fashion, which was amazing. You went out to Chicago to, to be on the show.

3 (45m 18s):
Well, I, I thought it was a joke. First of all, you know, my brothers and I are constantly playing tricks on each other. So I thought this was a total joke, but I realized it wasn't after a, a moment. So I was completely blown away and said yes. And it was the beginning of a new chapter for us.

0 (45m 38s):
And did that, I mean, this is 2005, so it's still early e-commerce days and I, I have to assume that e-commerce wouldn't become a significant part of your business for a few more years after that. But did that ha did that have an effect? Was there a spike in people ordering stuff online?

3 (45m 54s):
Yes, and we were so fortunate that we had e-commerce because had we not, it would've been a very different conversation, probably because it really propelled us in a way that I never could have imagined. She told us to back up our site. We had 8 million visitors in our first, almost second year in business.

0 (46m 17s):
I'm curious about how you felt or responded maybe internally to some of the, let's say criticisms or, or sniping, that that began early on. Right here, here we are, almost 20 years since you launched this brand, an enduring brand, a major global brand, which we're gonna trace over the course of this conversation. But initially when you launched there were, you know, there were people saying, well, you know, this is a socialite or this is a, a

3 (46m 47s):
Vanity project,

0 (46m 47s):
A vanity project. This is a wealthy couple who just, you know, and, and it's gonna die. And and did you feel like you had to prove something when you would hear that?

3 (46m 56s):
Well, I mean, okay, I, I can't say it wasn't hurtful because it was, that said, I mean, literally I hear it every five minutes from my parents. Negativity is noise, buckle up, thicken your skin, this is going to be a rollercoaster. Hmm. I mean, I, I had those conversations. I, I knew what I was getting into and I'd also had those snipes before and it definitely got to me at times and, and my mother is my north star, and whenever it would get to me, I would call her and I hear, you're Tori Robinson. Don't you know who you are? Even just when I was little, but always building me up and my brothers and my family were, they were like my, my strength.

3 (47m 44s):
And you know, when you go back to the concept of a lot of money, there's perception in reality. And I wouldn't say we had a tremendous amount of money at the time when we launched this company. And it was, it was not something we took it, it was a big risk lightly. It was a big risk. And I, I really tuned it out and I, I learned to tune it out even more. And I think it's a very freeing concept when you don't listen and you don't read and you just keep your head down and, and keep going and, and believing in yourself.

0 (48m 24s):
And yeah, I mean, you know, occasionally, like, we'll I'll hear from, from somebody who'll say, oh, you know how I built this guy, Ross didn't, didn't start a a, a big company. And, and so what does he know about business? Right? There were also people who said, well, Tori Birch is not a designer. What does she know about design?

3 (48m 42s):
Oh my god. So many things like that. And by the way, I didn't even think of myself as a designer either. So, so there you have it. I was the hardest on myself. So I would say not until about four years ago did I consider myself a designer. And, and, and, and proud to say it, even though I loved, I worked with incredible designers over the years, but personally I'm the hardest on myself. So I, yes, she wasn't a designer. People would come up to me and say, do you go to the office? I mean, I'm working 13 hour days. So for me to hear something like that is pretty shocking.

0 (49m 22s):
Don't we come back in just a moment. Tori faces a crisis when the most important partnership in her life falls apart. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This

5 (49m 46s):
From Wondery Comes a new series, flipping the Bird, Elon versus Twitter, a story about what happens when the richest man on the planet decides to acquire a powerful social media company in the name of free speech. But does he have what it takes? It

6 (50m 2s):
Started off promising

5 (50m 4s):
Or is this all just about Elon?

7 (50m 7s):
He's essentially mad that his tweets aren't performing as well as he would've expected of two,

8 (50m 14s):
But really just felt like, okay, this really is just a platform being ruled by a dictator who does things on his own whims

5 (50m 21s):
And what will be left of Twitter by the time he's done,

9 (50m 24s):
Basically my entire team was gone. By the end of it, infrastructure was just completely gutted. He'll like tweet a thing and then everyone's like, we gotta work on that now because he tweeted it. I'm supposed to believe

10 (50m 34s):
This man is a genius.

8 (50m 35s):
It just felt like everything was kind of descending into chaos.

5 (50m 38s):
Follow flipping the Bird. Wherever you get your podcasts, Hey prime members, you can listen to episodes, add free on Amazon music, download the Amazon music app today.

0 (50m 53s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. So it's 2006 and two years into the business, Tory Birch, the brand has already gotten a boost from being on Oprah. But Tory Birch, the founder, is still doing everything she can to build momentum.

3 (51m 9s):
We also built it in a very scrappy way. We were doing trunk shows. I was taking suitcases of product to Greenwich and to to Atlanta and to Palm Beach. And I would have, I would go places where I had friends.

0 (51m 25s):
Yeah, they would host a party party, they would host

3 (51m 27s):
A party like

0 (51m 28s):
Avon

3 (51m 28s):
Or, or it was literally like Avon. I was kind of always obsessed with the Avon model and it was kind of, they were becoming term brand ambassadors and it was becoming word of mouth and it was just building like that.

0 (51m 44s):
I wanna ask you about what is now sort of an iconic shoe that you designed came out in 2006, which was named after your mom. It was called the Riva. Lots of people listening know that shoe. It's a ballet flat with the gold double T medallion, like a on the top of the shoe at the top of the foot. And that went crazy, that shoe. Just what, tell me about the design of that shoe and how it landed. Like what was it about that moment in time and that design that just like met, you know, like it wasn't a heel, it wasn't a pump, it wasn't a, you know, people were buying stilettos, it was sex in the city.

0 (52m 25s):
People were Yeah. Right, right, right. They were buying Nolo

3 (52m 28s):
Was the opposite. Yeah, it was about comfort and it was about this concept of a ballet flat. And I always felt that a ballet flat was super classic. And I'll never forget it because Bridget Klein, who had joined our company from Michael Kors, she

0 (52m 44s):
And she would eventually become your president, I think

3 (52m 46s):
President and I'll never forget her boss at the time John Idle told her it was career suicide coming to work for us. I, I was in this meeting with Vince Camuto and he was a footwear manufacturer. He had his own collections, but he, he had called us because he was interested in a licensing deal. And I rightfully also, you know, probably with Chris too, we, we weren't excited about licensing in general. I wanted to be extremely careful about licensing

0 (53m 17s):
Because it would dilute the brand or something. It was

3 (53m 20s):
Dilutive and I had seen so many wonderful brands do too much licensing and it was, it, it scared me. So we, we set up a production agreement. It was a very different kind of deal. So, so we talked to Vince about this concept of this ballet flat. And I, I had this idea of our logo being the design element, not necessarily a logo. So I put it on our toe and on this deconstructed super comfortable shoe. And, and that was the beginning of the Riva Ballet Flat, which then all of a sudden just was worn by Jessica Alba and Cameron Diaz and Paris Hilton and Katie Holmes.

3 (54m 1s):
I could go on and on. How did

0 (54m 3s):
You, I mean, you were still a pretty small company at the time and you were well connected because of your experience in the industry, but did you have a, like a, a strategic way to get those things to those kinds of people? This is pre influencer influencers were actually real humans, like, you know, getting photographed. It wasn't social media. So did you have a way to get those things to them?

3 (54m 28s):
Well, I think again, it was through friends and we also had a wonderful young girl named Samantha Gregory. She came to do our pr and, and we, we, we gave, we gave it maybe to some people, I don't remember exactly, but it, it ended up becoming this sort of word of mouth type of thing. And I think that was kind of something that's missing today because with, with instant gratification of all this social media, you don't have that concept of building and sort of learning about something. It's, everything's out there.

0 (55m 6s):
You were, you know, running this business, you know, small team and it's growing and you're getting more attention and this very formative time in the business. Your marriage collapses, your marriage ends, you and Chris split. Tell me, tell me what was happening.

3 (55m 31s):
I mean, it was the most difficult period of my life and you know, I, to have a marriage fall apart when you have six children that are all very young and our parents were great friends and our families were completely intertwined. Like our, both of our families are from Phil, from Philadelphia. Right. And they became very close. Wow. So I was very close with my sister-in-laws and my brother-in-laws and all the cousins, and I'm a huge family person, so you can imagine it was excruciating. And the boys were really young, they were, zer was probably four, and Henry and Nick were seven.

3 (56m 17s):
And then I had my stepdaughters that were all in their teens and they were like my kids. Also, I, when I married Chris, I made the decision that I would treat all of our kids the same. And so to go through something like that and do it in a public way when you're the most private person and wanting to protect your kids and your family, it was, it was incredibly difficult.

0 (56m 46s):
How did you compartmentalize the personal side of, and so obviously professional side too, because Chris was involved with the business and you, you know, was Tori Birch, right? And so how did you kind of compartmentalize what was happening in your personal life and then show up to work and run the business and smile?

3 (57m 8s):
Yeah, it was one thing I am good at is compartmentalizing things. And I would say even though that's a strength, this was incredibly difficult. Yeah. I think everyone likes to get this scoop on what's going on with divorces and, you know, it becomes everyone's story. And I just, you know, for me it, it, I really do live my life where I disengage and yeah, when with that kind of like gossip and, and particularly when you're the focus of the gossip, it's not fun. I had vanity fair writing stories on me and also the company was taking off.

3 (57m 52s):
So you had this like family type of business that you had employees you wanted to protect. You had your actual family, you wanted to protect, you wanted to protect the business and protect yourself because when you're being written about, it's hard. That said, I, I found the inner strength and, and courage and my mom always said to me and dad that you wake up and tomorrow's a whole new day. And I kept thinking that the tomorrows took longer than I'd hoped, but it was how I looked at it.

0 (58m 31s):
That that next year your, your father passed away as well. I, I mean, I can't imagine how, just challenging of a time that was between the end of your marriage, your dad passing away. I know you were really close with him and running the business.

3 (58m 48s):
Yeah, I would say my father passing away as, as you said, I get choked up because that was probably hands down the hardest out of anything. And I, it was just, you know, he had been sick, but it was, he was better and he was getting better and then he had a heart attack, so it was incredibly sudden and it was just on top of everything, but it really just made everything pale in comparison. It just was, I saw the toll it was taking on my mother and, you know, listen, he, he lived a great long life, but he was still my dad and, you know, it was, I was just not expecting it.

0 (59m 30s):
One of the decisions that you, you took in the, in the period of time after, after your split and, and what was going on was you, you had, you had your, your brother Robert come and join the company. And I'm curious about that. I mean, it seems like you really,

3 (59m 48s):
You can imagine the conversations with Chris.

0 (59m 51s):
I mean it also seems like you really, you've always kind of leaned on on, you talk a lot about your mom and of, of course about your dad, but your dad was gone and it sounds, seems like particularly Robert, your brother was like a rock too, something really

3 (1h 0m 5s):
Yeah, he's been a second father figure to me. He's nine years older and he's always been a, a pillar for me, a rock, as you said, he's, he's also brilliant. And when I finally convinced him to come on board and be part of the company, he was doing other things. He was working on, I think, selling a company. And so I, I was so grateful that he, he came and not only, as it turns out, has he been in-house legal in new business development. He's helped me build the comp the business over the years, and he's like, he also personifies our culture.

0 (1h 0m 47s):
In, in 2009, you were finally able to launch that foundation that you wanted to launch the Tory Burch Foundation. And, and tell me about the idea behind it. What did you want it to be?

3 (1h 0m 58s):
Well, so I wasn't exactly sure in the beginning of when I started the company exa I knew I wanted to help women and children. And what I realized is that I was an entrepreneur and there were a lot of exceptional women in business that weren't as lucky enough to have the access that I had. And so I thought maybe that I could help women get access to all kinds of things, whether it would be capital or, or each other, or her other business leaders. And, and so in 2009, that was what we started. And even though we were doing a lot of work, I wanted real numbers.

3 (1h 1m 41s):
So we partnered with Bank of America to help women get access to low lower interest loans. And, and their commitment of a hundred million was something that I was so excited about. And that's something that I, as a leader in business, would love to impart on startups and other businesses that doing good is good for business. And that's something that in the early days, I was pretty much laughed out of the room. And when I talked about building this global lifestyle brand so I could start a foundation, I was told never to say that. And that business and philanthropy don't go hand in hand. And I was told that more than 10 times by many people.

3 (1h 2m 25s):
And so to see that sea change happen today is very gratifying.

0 (1h 2m 32s):
Alright. Around, I think around 2011, you had, you and Chris had separated and, but he was still, he still owned a significant amount of the company. And one, one of the, I think I imagined the challenges was he launched a, his own apparel brand in 2011 called C Wonder. And I don't know what, what was your feeling when that, because it opened, we opened a store. Yes. And, and did you, would, did you, were you aware that it was gonna happen? Was it a surprise? You

3 (1h 3m 8s):
Know, I was aware he was working on a concept and I was fully supportive of that until I went to see the store and that, that was the first I'd ever, I had seen anything that he was working on.

0 (1h 3m 21s):
And how did you, what did you think when you saw the store?

3 (1h 3m 24s):
Yeah, I thought it was a big problem because it was taking cues from our brand and doing it in a way that would be damaging from our intellectual property standpoint.

0 (1h 3m 38s):
Basically, it, it, it looked like Tory bird stuff, but

3 (1h 3m 42s):
I would say it sort of looked like some of our stuff. Yeah. And it was close enough that it was a big problem.

0 (1h 3m 49s):
So the this, I guess is in the sort of the midst of a period of some back and forth kind of sniping and challenges. And Chris is not here to, I've met Chris before and not to defend himself, defend himself. So I'm gonna try to step in as best I can, but imagine from his perspective, he's thinking, well, you know, I, yeah, I'm, I've got a lot of experience doing apparel and I'm entitled to start my own brand. But he still owned a significant stake in Tori Birch and I'm assuming was, was on the board or had, you know, some influence there. So he

3 (1h 4m 23s):
Was on the board.

0 (1h 4m 23s):
What did that mean? I mean, did you have conversations with him and say, Hey, you know,

3 (1h 4m 28s):
This is a problem. Yeah. And we need to deal with it because this doesn't work. And he's sitting in board meetings and having proprietary information and starting something that would be brand damaging. So we wanted him to change his concept, and then he sued us. He sued me personally and my entire board.

0 (1h 4m 52s):
And I imagine this was fodder for the press.

3 (1h 4m 55s):
Oh, they loved it. Right. It was like a dream come true for the press.

0 (1h 4m 60s):
Yeah. And, and so all of a sudden you're once again in the press for the wrong reasons, the reasons you didn't want to be in.

3 (1h 5m 7s):
No.

0 (1h 5m 8s):
And so at that point, presumably you kind of did not communicate much.

3 (1h 5m 15s):
I, I mean, we had to because we also had young children and a lot of children. But I mean, we both tried to parent the best we could.

0 (1h 5m 26s):
I mean, litigation in any circumstance is stressful, but you know, companies and leaders are kind of, they have to expect it sometimes and you gotta just Right. March on. But, but it, but it,

3 (1h 5m 41s):
But not from within.

0 (1h 5m 42s):
Not within. It's different. Right.

3 (1h 5m 43s):
And also, I, I had to protect our company and our employees. You can imagine it was confusing.

0 (1h 5m 50s):
So you guys countersuit?

3 (1h 5m 52s):
Yes, we did.

0 (1h 5m 53s):
And your countersuit basically I think said, Hey, this is a knockoff brand and you guys are getting ready to go to court.

3 (1h 6m 1s):
Yeah. And luckily we didn't have to.

0 (1h 6m 4s):
Luckily you didn't, luckily you settled by, by the end of the year, you settled by,

3 (1h 6m 9s):
Literally we were in Hawaii. I'll never forget it. My brother didn't leave a hotel room for probably two weeks. He hadn't shaved. And we were lucky enough to find two extraordinary partners to, to buy Chris out.

0 (1h 6m 25s):
And basically it was in everyone's interest that this did not go to trial. Yes.

3 (1h 6m 30s):
It would've just been a complete waste of, of everything.

0 (1h 6m 35s):
So that was it, Chris, at that point, he sold his shares or most of his shares.

3 (1h 6m 41s):
Yeah. And that was something that was a relief. I think bringing b d t capital and General Atlantic in was an incredible, these are the partners

0 (1h 6m 53s):
That, that came in and bought, bought his shares out, the

3 (1h 6m 56s):
Private equity partners that bought Chris and some other people out. But I would say it was challenging. I am happy to say recently, like four or five years ago, we are the best of friends and we've gotten through the mess of everything he told me. It was a 10 year misunderstanding, which I had to laugh.

0 (1h 7m 17s):
All right, so now you are fully, I mean, it's sort of pretty much resolved and you can focus on, on, on the business. By 2013, you had 54 stores, 800 million in sales. Today I think it's closer to 350 stores. And there, there's something interesting about the stores too that like, I, I don't know if all of them do this, but I know that they would have like mini fridges stocked with beer and soda. They'd have iPads for kids. So tell me about that. About, about having all those things in the store.

3 (1h 7m 52s):
I mean, I've always wanted it to be welcoming, and I think in retail sometimes that's not always the case, that customers are intimidated. And so I always thought it would be great to have an environment where people could stay and get to know our sales team and, and sort of get their stories as well. And I think you get a lot of insight into the customer that way. So we, we tried to make it an environment that even from the beginning that you felt like you were walking into a living room

0 (1h 8m 24s):
And, and when you, I mean, when you, you sort of stepped down as CEO and that happened in 2018, and now your husband, Pierre e Russel is the ceo and he was, yeah, obviously we were together before he was ceo and he came from L V M H where he was a CEO there. And you were CEO for I think 14 years or something like that. It's a long time for anyone to Well,

3 (1h 8m 55s):
It's too long in retrospect. And you know, what I realized is I learned my passion over the years and it wasn't operating a business. It was really designing the product and the creativity and being able to be focused just on design. And the product creation, I think has been transformative for the business and for the product for sure. I mean, it's, I I went from me spending 30% of my time on it to a hundred percent. And I, I do feel that we're just hitting our stride.

0 (1h 9m 32s):
Obviously starting an enduring brand in any category is really hard. But if you were like advising somebody who wanted to start an enduring fashion brand today, I mean, could they take your playbook and do that today? Or is it, is is that just the, the business changed so much?

3 (1h 9m 49s):
Yeah, I mean, I think there's elements of our playbook, but certainly they need a new one. And I think that we need a new one and we always need a new one. And we're always, we have our core strategy, and that's not changing, but the world is changing so quickly and we need to be evolving and changing with it and, and be intellectually curious and, and not just jump on everything. Just think about what's important that applies to our business.

0 (1h 10m 20s):
Tori, do you imagine a a, a day when you might sell this company? Or do you, do you see a future where it's like more like Estee Lauder, where Tory Burch is a family business in perpetuity?

3 (1h 10m 34s):
You know, I just, I, I don't know the answer to that. I'm so not ready to sell this company or I, I hope that we're here for a long time and Pi and I love working together. We love working with the team that we have and we have so much we wanna do. So I don't think about selling the company. That's not something that I'm actively thinking about. I think it's a luxury to be private.

0 (1h 11m 2s):
Yeah. When you think about this journey that you've had and and where this brand and, and business is today, how much of it it do you think has to do with the work and the, and the skills that you brought, and how much would you attribute to luck?

3 (1h 11m 21s):
I think it's definitely both, because there's been a lot of luck along the way, and I'm an extremely stu superstitious person, so I realize that. But the, there has been such a tremendous amount of work that has gone into this company by so many people and, and me included. So I think they go hand in hand. And I think that we always need a little luck, and I'm hoping that that continues. But I don't see a world where we're not working and, and doing inspiring work. But it's hard work that that's ahead.

0 (1h 12m 2s):
That's Tory Birch, founder and executive chairman of Tory Birch to us. One more question for you. When you are, when you're not wearing Tori Birch, who do you, who do you wear?

3 (1h 12m 13s):
Oh, well I do wear a lot. In fact, I just went to the Met and I wore Chanel by Carl Lagerfeld. By

0 (1h 12m 20s):
The way, when you, when you go, like when you see people wearing costumes like Jared Lado wearing a catsuit with a giant cat head, how does he sit down for dinner?

3 (1h 12m 30s):
I know, I actually, they have a lot of trouble. Even one of our dresses, I felt badly because it's quite large.

0 (1h 12m 36s):
How do they do that? Is he holding the cat head?

3 (1h 12m 39s):
Well, no. I probably think the cat head had a chair next to him. I don't know that for sure because I wasn't seated next to him. But the creativity is, is pretty spectacular.

0 (1h 12m 50s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by Rameen era Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Catherine Seifer. Our production staff also includes Casey Hermann, Sam Paulson, Liz Metzger, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

0 (1h 13m 30s):
Hey, prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early in ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.