NPR (0s):
What's happening with NPR podcasts, more shows, issues, ideas, stories, flavors, and personalities, and you can shake a stick out. Are we whisper the more the world that you hear, the more you hear the world as it really is. So come experience more neighborhoods or identities or species, more perspectives, NPR, podcasts, more voices, all ears. Find NPR, wherever you get your podcasts.

K12 (30s):
Did you know, only 45% of high school students feel they are prepared for college or careers. Today's sponsor stride. Career prep is helping change that stride career prep, let students take charge of their education and their future. By combining real world skills training and traditional academics, students can earn college credit while in high school or get the training needed to land a job right after graduation stride, career prep prepares your teen for in demand careers in business tech, health science, criminal justice, and more students can take courses developed by industry professionals, prepare for certifications, get hands-on experience network, and most importantly gain the confidence to succeed. Strive. Career prep is backed by over 20 years of experience in online learning take charge today at K-12 dot com slash podcast.

1 (1m 33s):
So 1982, this is the first year since this is the founder to me in 75, that you actually lost money and the bank, I guess that was lending you. Money started getting nervous.

2 (1m 44s):
Yes, we had got a call from the bankers, say that they want us to come down and rent a very traditional bank building. And I've ever recall getting off the elevator, walking down the hall and the side of the frosted glass above the door and said, asset recovery department,

1 (1m 60s):
Asset recovery department. That's not a good sign.

2 (2m 3s):
That's what didn't have to be a banker to realize what that meant.

1 (2m 13s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how Charlie Clifford's time as a peace Corps, volunteer inspired an import business that eventually became the high-end luxury brand. To me, There's a moment you may remember from my interview a few years ago with John Foley, the founder of Peloton, he mentioned that when he first started selling his stationary bikes, he priced them at around $1,200.

1 (2m 57s):
At the beginning, sales were sluggish. Apparently customers thought a $1,200 bike was too cheap and was probably low quality. So John Foley raised the price to $2,000 and soon sales started to pick up. Now, as some of you who went to business school, now this is called a premium pricing strategy. It's what you do to signal to consumers that what you're selling is exclusive special available only to the most discerning customer. It helps explain why people will pay more for a bottle of Dom Perignon or a cotton t-shirt by Balenciaga.

1 (3m 37s):
The price is part of the brands, very identity, I mean, is that Canada goose coat really keeping you warmer than the one at H and M well, to the consumer who pays a thousand bucks for that Canada goose coat, it doesn't really matter, which brings me to today's guest Charlie Clifford, the founder of Tumi luggage. You may know to me from its ubiquitous presence at airports and high-end shopping malls, the brand makes very good luggage, high quality, practical, and expensive anywhere from 600 to $3,000 a bag, which as you will hear was part of the strategy.

1 (4m 18s):
When Charlie started selling ballistic nylon bags in the early 1980s, he wanted to attract a certain type of high-end traveler. So he designed his bags to be sleek and strong and easy to use any price them at what you might call the lower range of luxury. Charlie understood that enough people care about luggage and use it often enough to be willing to spend that kind of money on it. And the interesting thing about to me is that unlike many products that start high-end, but eventually wind up on a bargain basement rack to me stayed high-end and flourish there.

1 (4m 59s):
Charlie moved on from the company when it was sold to a private equity firm in 2004, but in 2016, when Samsonite acquired to me, it was valued at $1.8 billion, but Charlie wasn't done after he sold to me, he launched yet another high-end luggage brand called Rome. But as you will hear, luggage is by no means a Bulletproof industry over the past 40 years, Charlie's brands have had three life-threatening challenges. The first with the big recession in 1982, just as he was getting to me off the ground, then came the massive downturn in travel after nine 11 in 2001.

1 (5m 41s):
And most recently with this new company, Rome travel again, ground to a halt when COVID hit, but let's start a few years before to me began after growing up in New Jersey and attending college there. And in Indiana, Charlie joined the peace Corps in the late 1960s and spent two years working in Chiclayo Peru

2 (6m 3s):
Chick Leia was lacking in support for small businesses and for entrepreneurs. And in some of the other areas approved, they had developed industrial parks. They would have all of the, all the electricity, all of the infrastructure that that businesses need to operate. So there was another peace Corps volunteer for the MBA program by the majority pap Antonio, who was assigned to Chiclayo along with us and Jerry and I worked with a, a group of people to the sponsorship of the chamber of commerce. And essentially we set up a local group of business people to encourage them to organize and promote the idea of a, of Chiclayo getting an industrial park.

1 (6m 44s):
All right. So you obviously you're in the peace Corps for that two year period, and then eventually you returned to the U S and from what I understand, you, you get a job in managing management for like a large company that operates supermarkets. But I, I gather that around five years in, you start to get restless, right?

2 (7m 4s):
Yes. I was definitely restless and I recognized that I would probably do better at an environment that was not a corporate environment. Almost all of my friends were in the corporate world. They were moving up, they were happy, but I was, I guess I had enough independence and was enough of a Maverick that I, I felt that getting involved in something that was more entrepreneurial. That was my, my own thing would be, would be more interesting and ultimately more satisfying.

1 (7m 28s):
Did you start to have conversations with friends? Did you start to talk to people about ideas?

2 (7m 33s):
Yes. Yes. During the period I was there, I carried on communications with my old friend for the peace Corps, and we talked about potentially starting a business together. And because we had a wonderful experience in Peru, first thing we thought about was potentially getting involved with importing Peruvian handcrafts.

1 (7m 51s):
And what was the name of his friend,

2 (7m 52s):
Jerry pepper, Antonio, Jerry and I were learned from another friend and other peace Corps friend that George Maillard had set up a company that was importing handcrafts from Peru and actually several other south American countries. The name of the company, the trading name was LABA line. Had George had been an associate director of the, of the peace Corps. And Peru went on to be head of the peace Corps in Uruguay, after leaving for Ru lovely guy who I was happy to go into business with.

1 (8m 22s):
And what was he doing? Tell me, tell me a little bit about what he was bringing in

2 (8m 25s):
The origin is his business partner, danda Danielson, another XP score guy we're bringing in handcrafted rugs, handloom rugs, wall hangings hand-carved gourds, hand knit sweaters, costume jewelry that was made by hand. And I became their regional sales person. I was calling on and visiting stores in the Northeast, going to trade shows and basically helping them sell their various products.

1 (8m 50s):
And this is in the mid seventies. Was there a market for it? Were people interested in mainly indigenous crafts from Andean region was their enthusiasm for this stuff.

2 (9m 2s):
There was a reasonable amount of enthusiasm, particularly in the gift store market, but at the Northeast, I was able to sell to bad burgers at New Jersey at Bloomingdale's in New York to their gift departments. And we, we enjoyed a pretty good business there,

1 (9m 15s):
I guess, not too long into your time there, cause you were selling a bunch of different products from a bunch of different categories and, and you felt that maybe it was the leather goods that you should focus on, that the company should focus on. What, what were the leather products they were selling?

2 (9m 31s):
I should have mentioned those at the outset. They were selling some leather handbags and some small leather duffel bags that were made in Columbia. A very rustic, very rugged, very, a very natural leather for the most part, a very well-priced. It was a good price value relationship. So I felt that we should focus on that category because unlike handcrafts, which patterns would vary and sometimes what people ordered it at a wall hanging or a rug, it would come in slightly differently because they were made by by artist is the sizing might be different. The colors might be different. So I thought that leather bags would offer the opportunity to focus on a product that had a lot of hand work in it, but essentially be able to be pre-produced consistently the same way every time.

1 (10m 17s):
So you thought the leather bags that they were selling that was really where the business should focus on, but I guess your partners did not see it that way. And from what I understand, you, you decide to leave it wasn't like it was, it was amicable, it was perfectly amicable, but you just decided that, you know, maybe I'll go and go my own way.

2 (10m 33s):
That's right. The two fellows who, who all the majority of the company they were reluctant at work did not want to focus on leather. So with their blessing, I essentially had an introduction to their leather supplier in Columbia. Yeah. I've found to my original business partner or another leather supplier. And we set off to focus on the other leather business.

1 (10m 53s):
And this was a man named Seth McQuillan I think, right.

2 (10m 56s):
That's correct. Nice guy, smart guy. I was not involved in leather goods, but he did have experience importing products from Columbia.

1 (11m 5s):
So you and Seth decide to join forces and focus on importing leather bags from Columbia. I think this is 1975 and, and you decide to call the company to me. First of all, just tell me about that name. To me,

2 (11m 21s):
It's a, basically a ceremonial knife that was used back in the, the Inca days. It's got a proven God figure out it at the bottom of the knife is a curved blade. It was also used as a symbol used for wall posters by the Peruvian tourism by promotional agency. So that the two we figure was, was a figure that was near and dear to my heart. And when we were trying to come up with a name, I, I thought to me was one that would travel well. And for some people that sounded Italian for other people finish, it sounded, it was very easy to pronounce for the Japanese. So I thought it was a name that would, would travel very well over time.

1 (12m 1s):
All right. So you, the two of you joined forces, you've got to me, and I think you both invested a few thousand dollars to get this started, right? Like 5,000 bucks. Is that about right?

2 (12m 10s):
I think we had $10,000 between us,

1 (12m 12s):
Right. And the plan was to basically import these leather bags. Well, they're like duffle bags. Describe the kind of bags that you were importing.

2 (12m 22s):
Our most important product originally was, was a deed, leather, duffel bags. They were, they were made from very rustic leather that had kind of a hand-crafted look to them, which they should have because they were made by leather artisans. And they became very popular because they were very well-priced. I believe our most popular size at the time was selling for $49. Then 55, then $59. So tremendous value. It would be several hundred dollars today. We found a ready marketplace for them in, in stores where there were people were crafting leather sandals and making leather belts. They were, they were happy to buy our leather bags because their customers might think that they were, these bags were being made in the back of these stores where indeed they were, they were, they were vacant and products for themselves.

1 (13m 9s):
Right. So online, I mean, it was just, it was just leather. I mean, you would open it up and inside was, it was like a rough texture of the inside of the leather hide.

2 (13m 19s):
It was the nap side of the leather. That's correct. In the early days,

1 (13m 22s):
Not waterproof,

2 (13m 23s):
Definitely not waterproof.

1 (13m 24s):
All right. I read that, that first year of business, 1976, I guess you did pretty well six over $600,000 in sales. I mean that's 1976. That's a lot of money. Yes. I mean, I would have thought, and I'm, I'm not spoiling the story here, but for anyone listening, this is going to get dark for some time. This story is going to get dark and challenging, but I'm thinking 1976, you guys must be like, high-fiving each other thinking we're crushing it. $600,000 our first year. It's this it's only up from here.

2 (13m 55s):
Yeah. I don't remember thinking we were crushing it. I think we were happy that we were making progress, that we made progress for another five or six years steady progress. But I think any, any entrepreneur, part of what motivates you is, you're always looking over your shoulder and we certainly weren't fat and happy. We weren't making a killing in terms of being able to take a lot of money out of the business. We were still very much of a mom and pop business, so happy with the progress, but by no means thinking we had had made it

1 (14m 25s):
All right. So you had this line, it was leather. And that was, that was your brand. That was what you were doing. But I guess at a certain point 81 82, you felt like there was an opportunity to branch out beyond leather. Tell me about sort of the evolution of your thinking around that. What made you think that the opportunities might actually be outside of leather products?

2 (14m 47s):
Well, there were a couple of things, perhaps four or five years into this process. I remember discovering the fact that luggage, as you might surmise as an infrequently purchased product, people buy a piece of luggage and use it for a number of years, but many people do own a variety of travel bags, a variety of luggage. So we felt that if we move into the luggage stores, we could do a lot more business. And as we made this transition, we discovered that most travelers didn't want to buy a large leather suitcase because they, they felt that it might get damaged during transit when it was checked by the airlines. Yeah. So we felt that moving into a, a fabric, I said, thetic material would help us to penetrate this market

1 (15m 32s):
Meantime while you're kind of thinking about other fabrics, the businesses, I think steadily growing every year for the first five or six years, but the 19 81 82 recession hits. And all of a sudden, from what I understand things, just start to go downhill like very, very quickly because people forget, this was the biggest economic downturn in the U S since the great depression, the 82 recession was really bad.

2 (15m 58s):
Yeah. It was tough times. Inflation was spiraling out of control at one point during this period of prime interest rates, which I believe the height was 21.5% over 20%. Wow. Which is just inconceivable today.

1 (16m 15s):
Yeah. Yeah. I'm talking about 5% today and people are freaking out.

2 (16m 18s):
I'm not sure how we survive with that type of interest rates because our bank was our best business partner, which, which is another segment of the story.

1 (16m 26s):
You did not have any outside investors. You was just you and Seth and then borrowing from the bank.

2 (16m 31s):
Right.

1 (16m 32s):
So 1982, this is the first year since this is the founder to me in 75 that you actually lost money and the bank, I guess that was lending you money. Start to get nervous.

2 (16m 42s):
Yes. We had gathered with them to talk about quarterly results over lunch, and I can vividly remember the atmosphere changing from one from one second to the next one minute, to the next, when we told them that we'd actually lost money. The last quarter about the tone of the conversation sobered up very quickly. And before the end of the afternoon, got a call from the banker, say that they want us to come down and talk about the business the next week. So we went down on a Monday and they ran a very traditional plastic bank building. And I've got recall getting off the elevator, walking down the hall to the office number they had given us and the side on the frosted glass, above the door said asset recovery department.

1 (17m 27s):
I said, recovery department, that's not a good sign.

2 (17m 32s):
What? Didn't have to be a banker to realize what that,

1 (17m 35s):
The moment they were freaking out, that you guys were going to default on your loans.

2 (17m 39s):
Well, they were certainly concerned and they began to watch over the business very carefully. They looked at our budgets, our cashflow, they insisted during this period that we set up our receivables. So they would go into a lockbox.

1 (17m 52s):
Wait, let me just get, understand this. The money that you were getting from customers was going directly to a bank lockbox.

2 (17m 58s):
Once they put us into the asset recovery department, that's that was one of their requirements. That's correct.

1 (18m 4s):
So you didn't have control over your, your receivables.

2 (18m 6s):
We had use of the money, but the deposits were going first to the bank and that we had used use of it. The money was not going to repay the loan. They were letting us run our business, but they just wanted to take greater control because they were concerned about the, whether or not they were going to get repaid. And there was certainly a big brother mentality to just the relationship. No question about it.

1 (18m 29s):
Yeah. I mean, that must have been very, very, a very tense time because here you had this business, it was on the up and up and you were starting to kind of think about new product lines and moving into nylon and other fabrics. And all of a sudden this recession hits and sales drop. What did it, what about your partnership with Seth? Did that create any tension between the two of you, the financial situation?

2 (18m 51s):
Well, certainly when, when it, when a company is under duress like that, there's a tension that, that everybody in the company is, is aware of before this started, it was apparent that we had some different views as to the best way to run their business. And we had different vision for the business.

1 (19m 7s):
What was, what was the difference? Why did you see it differently? Like what did he want? What did you want?

2 (19m 12s):
I think one of the major differences was that I began to feel, we had to build a brand. We were existing because we had a, we're offering a nice product, a differentiated product, but we had no brand loyalty among consumers. We had

1 (19m 25s):
No, nobody was saying, oh, I gotta get, I gotta get a Tumi, leather, duffel bag. They were just, they were just seeing these leather bags and saying, I got a leather bag.

2 (19m 32s):
We weren't creating demand. We were getting sales because we were distributed by stores where people, people were going frequently looking to buy bags, but we were not creating any pull through demand.

1 (19m 44s):
And he wanted to stick with the existing business model.

2 (19m 48s):
Well, he was, let me just say he was more comfortable with, with the type of operation that we were running. I started pushing to put more features into the bags and to, to essentially to upgrade the products that we were selling, because it'd be, if he came again pretty clear to me that there was a terrific opportunity selling more expensive products to frequent travelers. And we would have discussions about whether we wanted to do that. There was risk involved. It was quite expensive for the time. So we were able to function it and do things together, but it was clear that we were seeing things somewhat differently. And the, and the financial crisis of the company certainly exacerbated the whatever differences there were.

1 (20m 32s):
I mean, this is a, this is a problem, right? Because you've got a partner you're equal partners and your vision is diverging significantly, which we've told the version of this story on the show in the past. That's that is a, a recipe for a lot of tension. So what did you do? I mean, did you, how did you, how did you work through that? I mean, did you say, Hey, let's try and try this out. Let's compromise. What was your plan at that point?

2 (20m 60s):
Well, unfortunately the tension that the real tension began when I decided that the business would be better off, if one of us were running it and I approached him and offered to buy him out, it was unexpected. It was out of the blue. And he was quite disconcerted by, by my suggestion that I wanted to buy the business. And that meant he would, would leave. If, if he agreed he would leave and go onto something else, the discussions were ought to get off again and, and lasted that the better part of two years, because we couldn't come to a degree. He did, he did not want to leave. And I was determined to see it through. And there were a couple of times that I attempted to backtrack and say, well, let's find a way to resolve.

2 (21m 45s):
There are different points of view and set of faith of working relationship. And we'll see this through together. But unfortunately I was not able to repair the damage that was done by, by the fact that I was the one who had approached him and suggested that, that I would buy him out at, during that period while we were having these negotiations and discussions, unfortunately, other people in the business became aware of it. We lost Jeff Broderson, our designer, who was hired by Samsonite, our most important sales person, who was a terrific guy, a very charismatic figure, who everybody in the company loved and his customers loved him.

2 (22m 25s):
So that two year period from 1983 to 85 was, was a struggle. There's no question about it. We were struggling with

1 (22m 33s):
When we come back. And just a moment, Charlie goes all in on turning to me into an upscale brand and how a snub from Samsonite turns out to be a blessing, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this.

MasterClass (22m 59s):
If you like listening to this podcast, it's probably because you're curious about the world and love to learn with masterclass. You can learn from the world's best minds, anytime, anywhere, and at your own pace. Masterclass offers classes on a wide variety of topics, all taught by world-class instructors at the top of their fields. You can learn how to be an entrepreneur from Richard Branson and prove your creativity and leadership skills with Anna winter, or learn about makeup and beauty from Bobby Brown with over a hundred classes available. That thing you've always wanted to do is closer than you think. I recently checked out Thomas Keller's class on cooking, because as you may know, I love to cook and I was blown away by how much I learned. And by the quality of the instruction, I highly recommend you check it out, get unlimited access to every masterclass. And as a, how I built this listener, you get 15% off an annual membership go to masterclass.com/built that's masterclass.com/built for 15% off masterclass.

Audible (24m 6s):
I'm pretty much always on the go. So I don't have a ton of time to do the things I want to do like reading, which is why I love audible. As an audible member, you can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog, including the latest, best sellers and new releases. All audible members get access to a growing selection of audio books, audible, originals, and podcasts that are included with every membership. You can listen to all you want plus more get added every month. In fact, you can even listen to my book. I know shameless plug, but you can listen to how I built this read by me right now on audible. Let audible help you discover new ways to laugh. Be inspired or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text B U I L T 2 500 500 that's audible.com/built or text built to 500, 500 to try audible free for 30 days, audible.com/built.

1 (25m 20s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this <inaudible>. So it's 1983 and to me is in trouble. It's recovering from a recession it's top designer has left and Charlie and his co-founder are not getting along. Meanwhile, the brand is making its first major pivot away from leather duffel bags and into serious luggage.

2 (25m 44s):
In 1983, we did introduce our ballistic nylon line, our garment bag, which was designed by, by Jeff Wilson, before he left became our best selling piece. It was a widely sought after the industry, because from a functional standpoint, we ended up thanks to Jeff's work with the best design garment bag of the industry. So from 1983 to 85, we had begun to recover. Thanks to the movement into it's a nylon luggage at the designs that Jeff Frodo said had come up with before he left for Samsonite.

1 (26m 17s):
So let me ask you about, about ballistic nylon. Cause this is now kind of a signature of, of, of what we think of to me today and other luggage brands. This was a fabric, I think that was developed literally for like flak jackets for the military. And it's this very durable nylon that you can throw around. I mean, there was a reason why I called the ballistic nylon because it covered Bulletproof vest. And I think a version of it still does and started to kind of sort of gain traction. I mean, D you mentioned the garment bags, was that also the ballistic nylon? Was that using the garment bags?

2 (26m 52s):
Yes, it was. It had a, for a very capacious outside pockets. Our designer had to come up with the concept of putting upside down U shape, flat opening. So if you imagine the, the way hatch opens on a ship, well, this would open the other way. The U shaped tongue would flap down and you had a very wide, easily accessible opening. So the pocket was easy to see what was inside the pocket. So they were very easy to pack it on pack,

1 (27m 20s):
Which has became a signature of Tumi. Luggage is now is widely used on luggage everywhere that sort of a U shaped flap at the top of the travel bag or the garment bag 1985, that year, you finally convinced Seth to sell his shares to you. How did you do that? Did you come to an agreement on the value of the company? Is that, is that would put it over the top.

2 (27m 44s):
We did. And that was not an easy, easy number to reach a agreement on, but we reached the number on the value and it was for a fixed amount of money and a, a percentage of sales up to, up to a cap for a number of years.

1 (27m 58s):
So you had to basically come up with that cash.

2 (28m 1s):
I had to come up with the cash for the down payment. That's correct. The business did buy the rest of his shares over, over time in terms of the fixed payments and the other percentage payments.

1 (28m 11s):
All right. So 1985, you're doing $4 million, a little over $4 million in sales. You've bought out Seth, and now you are the sole CEO. Yeah. And I guess you, you manage to rehire that designer who had left. He went to Samsonite, not just a competitor, but, well, I wouldn't even call him a competitor at the time cause they were the 800 pound gorilla on the block. How did you convince him to come back?

2 (28m 40s):
Well, my first phone call after we consummated the sale was to Jaffer, was living in Tucson, Arizona at the time. And I, I think he realized that by leaving Sampson and coming to, to me, instead of being a designer, one of many designers for Samsonite, he would be the designer for, to me. My second phone call was to Scott Harris, who was our New York salesperson who had become a manufacturer's rep. And fortunately Scott also agreed to join the company, became an instrumental part of building our sales team.

1 (29m 13s):
All right. So w so now that you sort of, your vision is going to be the vision of what this brand is going to become 1985, you've got the ballistic nylon bags and the travel bags. And, and did you start to think, you know, really we need to become a premium brand, like almost, not necessarily a luxury brand, but a brand that you know, is, is, is not for the everyday traveler, but maybe for the premium traveler.

2 (29m 40s):
That was an evolution again, as with most things in business, probably by the late eighties, we were moving into what I would call the a serious premium brand mentality by 1990 dialogue was, was, was dominating and it was dominating because it really is a more practical material for luggage. And we started making nylon bags and the, and the, in the U S from day one. And that was probably, I would think 1983. And we were lucky that we discovered an ad and the, at the industry trade journal luggage travel, where I think was called at the time, there was a company in Georgia run by a couple of brothers who basically had very catchy ad that said they did great work for, for low prices.

2 (30m 29s):
And that caught our attention. And we contacted them, started talking with them and, and ended up working with them for many, many years.

1 (30m 37s):
So, all right, you've got this bag and who is buying them in the late eighties? I mean, where, where are you selling these bags? Because I think at the time, you know, you were probably doing, you know, by the late eighties, maybe, I don't know, seven, $8 million in sales. Where, where were they being sold? Because you still are at this point primarily, or I think entirely an American based. I mean, that was your, that was where you were selling them.

2 (31m 2s):
That that's correct. Actually, I think we hit 10 million little over 10 million in 1988, but we were selling them primarily through luggage specialty stores. They became our brand ambassadors because the store owners and their salespeople became convinced that Tubi was the, essentially the best upscale, serious luggage for traveling professionals for frequent travelers in the, in the eighties, as we began the eighties, there was a brand called Hartmann luggage, which was a hundred year old respected American brand that, that had done a terrific job with nylon luggage. They were using a lighter weight pack, Claus nylon, khaki colored and heartburn had, had become a market leader, but the ballistic nylon, I think people saw it as more contemporary.

2 (31m 51s):
They responded to the black-on-black look. It was considered to be a more modern look, they'd liked the pocketing. And by the late eighties, a Hartman though, still very respected was becoming a little bit like a, like an Oldsmobile high-quality good brand, but it, it did that represent contemporary design. And to me, was able to fill that, that role due to the black on black look

1 (32m 15s):
Now by the late eighties, was, were you starting to gain traction as a brand? I mean, was it, was it still relatively kind of niche at that point or did more and more people know what to me was great.

2 (32m 27s):
Gaia was, it was certainly Nisha. It was, it was had good traction within the trade within luggage specialty stores and the, the department stores that we were beginning to partner with at the time. But we began doing some consumer advertising by putting black and white ads into airline magazines. And this was before everybody was traveling with their laptop and people would actually pull out the airline magazines from the, at the seat jacket. We had a, we had a black and white ad two-thirds of a page. And the only color of the ad was we had a red Tumi logo on our luggage style. And the, the ads were strictly feature and benefit. We had a picture of the garment bag, the headline was 500,000 miles from now.

2 (33m 12s):
This bag will look better than ever. We had bullet points and arrows going to the particular features. And we had enough people who were interested enough to perhaps take that ad and go into a luggage store and look at the brand that we ended up developing a, a bit of a cult following among the frequent travelers and long about 1990, we had become a market leader and the high-end luggage business in the U S

1 (33m 40s):
All right. So now I guess it's time to, to expand. And I guess the expansion that you really wanted to focus on was Europe.

2 (33m 49s):
Yes. For

1 (33m 49s):
People who listen to the show, they know all about distribution, right? Like whether it's, whether you're selling kombucha or cookies or whatever, like you, you have to work with distributors in, in many sectors, in many industries, including luggage. And I guess you went to, to Samsonite and you sort of what you kind of pitched them. You said, Hey, would you guys be open to being our distributor in Europe? Because they were a huge player, right?

2 (34m 16s):
They were, they were, they were dominant player in Europe and they were considered to be a more upscale brand in Europe than in the U S Samsonite was really the luggage of choice for business travelers. So I was a little bit naive and I both naive and audacious, and I have really had had no business approaching them, but I was able to get introduced to the vice president of marketing for Europe who was an American. He politely told me that they wanted to focus on their own brand, that they really would not be an appropriate business partner for us. I think what he was really thinking is there's no way in hell that to me is going to be successful in Europe. And why, why should we get involved?

2 (34m 56s):
And I ended up speaking with another Samsonite person, a highly regarded marketing guy who had left the company. And he basically took me aside and he said, look, you're, you're going in the wrong direction. If you, if you have, if you want to have any chance of being successful in Europe, you better do it yourself. You're not going to find a distributor. Who's going to devote the time and the resources, and we'll have the patience to do what it's going to take to, to be successful in Europe.

1 (35m 23s):
It's interesting because when you went to Samsonite asking for their help, they said, no, and that must have been quite discouraging. But upon later reflection, you would realize that that was actually good fortune, that they did not become a distributor because then they would have been involved in your business in a way that maybe you wouldn't want them to be.

2 (35m 43s):
You're absolutely right. Best thing that ever happened to us was at the thought, I got brushed off, head off, cut off at the past.

1 (35m 50s):
Right. But I'm sure at the time you felt like, like, like deflated, right? Like I can't go, how am I going to do this?

2 (35m 55s):
Oh, only momentarily. Only momentarily. Yeah. Having somebody say, no, it was not something that was new to me. You're used to it. And you pick yourself up and you figure out a different approach and go off and knock on a different door.

1 (36m 8s):
All right. So you know that you have to do this on your own. And there are ways to start right there. They're going to be trade shows and European countries and, and, and, you know, sort of different paths that you can enter. But you, from what I read you believe that the path into Europe was through Germany. That, that if you could make it in Germany, not France, not the UK, not in Italy, if you could make it in Germany, that was where you could really expand. Tell me why you were so fixated on Germany.

2 (36m 35s):
Well, there's several reasons. First of all, Germany was the largest market in Europe. Even at that time, there was an east Germany in west Germany. Germans are inveterate travelers.

1 (36m 46s):
Yes.

2 (36m 46s):
Most of Europeans, even at that time were getting five or six weeks of vacation a year. They also travel a lot on business. Germany was, is a tremendous export country. I think they've got the fifth highest export level in the world even today. So there's a, there's a traveling mentality of Germany, both for leisure and for business. And secondly, there was a, a large network of specialty stores in Germany. They typically would sell fashion handbags in addition to luggage. So these were thriving family businesses, like in America, many of them were second and third generation. So it was a very challenging market. It was a little bit like if you could make it in New York, you can make it anywhere.

2 (37m 28s):
Germany essentially was the Motherlode. If you will, of the leather goods industry in Italy, in Europe, excuse me.

1 (37m 34s):
But how do you, how do you do it? I mean, how did, because Germans have a very high standard when it comes to quality, right? And so you better be offering the best quality product. So how did you even break in, what was the, what was the first breakthrough you had there and had it happen?

2 (37m 51s):
Well, again, what you do in a situation like that, as you go to people who who know more than you do about potential solutions. In this case, I went to a, one of the top leather goods, retailers in Germany, set up an appointment with them and told them I wanted to come down and talk with him about a new brand that was entering the marketplace during the appointment, I pulled out a leather bag and he took one, look at it, put his hand on it. And he said, is this leather or plastic? And I, I knew we were in trouble because I had not, I had been at a rush and I didn't take, I really didn't take enough time to pick out my samples carefully. And we were manufacturing our leather goods in Columbia at the time.

2 (38m 33s):
And when the leather was good, it was quite good. Often it was mediocre. And in this case was one of the poorer quality pieces that had just slipped through it.

1 (38m 42s):
He asked you if your leather bag was plastic. That is, that is quite an indictment. You

2 (38m 48s):
Did it with a straight face

1 (38m 49s):
Plastic. That is not a good sign.

2 (38m 52s):
Good, good side is he didn't ask me to leave. He, he, he was, he was, he was a gentleman at the, fortunately he did not order the leather during that trip, but he did like the holistic to the point that he said, would you mind taking an order? And I said, gee, you know, I really came to see you to get some feedback on the marketplace. And we really haven't priced our products yet. And my day was made when he smiled at me, he said, well, why don't you take the order anyway, you'll know what I wanted. When you, when you finalize your prices, you could just send me a copy of the order with the prices. So at that point, I knew that I knew, I knew we had some possibilities.

1 (39m 30s):
Wow. And that was strictly on the strength of just showing them a sample of that ballistic nylon bag.

2 (39m 36s):
Yes. He recognized the quality of the material that I was or performance material that could create superior performance for the product. And he liked the design of the thesis.

1 (39m 48s):
And throughout the 1990s, to me really began to expand. I mean, you eventually gotten into, into dozens of stores in Germany, you got into Harrods and London, you were growing in Europe, you were also in Japan. And, and from what I understand, you were on the road all the time. Yeah. What about on the home front? I mean, you, you w w did it, was, it was that challenging for you to be on the road all the time? You have a family and, you know, how did you cope with that?

2 (40m 18s):
Well, I don't, certainly I could not have done what I was able to do if I didn't have at Bader a great choice in terms, or in charge of the woman. I married cricket, held the home front together. She was, she was working full-time herself. She was an adult educator, but she was able to keep the kids pointed in the right direction. And essentially are, my children were very understanding and supportive as well. But I was probably on the road, depending on the time of the year, 30 to 40% of the time during the night, sir, certainly the 30, 30% plus range.

1 (40m 55s):
I mean, by the end, and I should mention, throughout this time in the 1990s, you were still self financing. You were not, you had, no, you had some friends and family who put a little bit of money here and there, but you had, no, you had no private equity money or any outside of Medras had investors. Right?

2 (41m 9s):
We did not,

1 (41m 10s):
But presumably to go even further, you needed more money, right? Cause just, just dealing with lines of credit and, and loans sometimes isn't enough. So I guess at a certain point in, in the late nineties or early two thousands, you made the decision that we should bring in some, some outside money we should bring in some private equity capital. Yes. And I think you signed a memorandum of understanding what a private equity company and in the year 2000, and they were going to make a, a significant investment into me, which was going to help you really scale. Even further, that money did not come in. What, what happened?

2 (41m 47s):
Well, it didn't come in for a couple of re well, one major reason we signed the MOU in December of 2000. Unfortunately, December of 2000 was not a good year for this retailer's Christmas was, did not meet expectations. the.com bubble was about to burst. I think consumers were aware of shifting winds. The early months of, of 2001 were not good were started. The economy started to slip. Therefore we started to miss our projections. And as we began missing our projections, the private equity firm, they came back once they came back a second time and finally they came back a third time in the summertime and to renegotiate the deal because we weren't making projections in August.

2 (42m 36s):
I went back to H and Q or investment banker and said, look, this deal, wasn't going to happen. Let's go back to the marketplace. And we'll, we'll, we'll have to end this, or I should say, add the MOU term and go back to the marketplace. And that was probably a month before nine 11, which turned the world upside down.

1 (42m 55s):
And of course the travel industry upside down, because I think up until that point, you were averaging 20% growth year over year, you had to slow down. But as you say, you started to see some upswing a little bit nine 11 happens. I read your sales declined by 40%.

2 (43m 15s):
Yeah. It was close to close to 40%, right after there's a media tall to the travel industry stores stopped buying people weren't looking for or traveling. They weren't looking for luggage. It was a very, very grim period.

1 (43m 29s):
What were you, did you have anxiety?

2 (43m 32s):
Did I have anxiety? You asked that. It just I'm sure.

1 (43m 39s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Charlie salvage is the business eventually sells it and then goes back to the drawing board to create a whole new luggage brand. Stay with us. I'm guy Raz, and you're listening to how I built this. No one is slowing down in this hiring race for the best talent and offering the right benefits may help you reward and retain your team, helping them feel valued, motivated, and ready for the future. And that can make all the difference for your business. Principal offers retirement and group benefits plans customized to help you meet your goals.

1 (44m 24s):
Your company's future depends on its people. Show them they are valued and give them the tools they need to succeed. Talk to your financial professional today about the right benefits and retirement plans from principal and visit them at principal.com/business. This message was brought to you by principal financial group, but it's important to their wonderful lawyers that we share their legal name, which is the principle life insurance company de Moines, Iowa. For important information about their products, visit principal.com/disclosures, British scandals change the course of history. They bring down governments, overthrow the rich and cause the mighty to fall.

1 (45m 5s):
Some are about love and murder. Others about politics, money, and high crimes. In the end, they're all about power. The team that brought you, American scandal goes across the pond to bring you British scandal, a podcast hosted by Alice Levine and Matt Ford. In the latest season, you'll hear about the Hatton garden heist, one of the largest burglaries in British history. It was carried out by six elderly men who were all experienced thieves. When all was said and done, they made out with stolen goods that amounted to over 14 million British pounds, find out how they did it. Listen to British scandal on apple podcasts, Amazon music, or wherever you listen, listen to new episodes early in ad free by joining Wondery plus in the Wondery app.

1 (46m 1s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2001 just after nine 11 and world travel has ground to a halt literally overnight. And once again to me is in trouble.

2 (46m 17s):
The first thing we had to do was create a plan to survive. We were in a survival mode and we knew the first order of business would be to cut costs. And that meant letting, letting some good people go, which was very, very difficult because you develop personal relationships with the people that at a small business.

1 (46m 34s):
I think you had to lay off 150 of your 500 employees.

2 (46m 38s):
It was, it was, it was definitely that neighborhood. So for the survival of the business, we had no choice, but to, to make those decisions. And, and yes, it was extremely difficult.

1 (46m 48s):
Charlie, when you are facing a situation where you've got to get to engage in mass layoffs and to save the business at the same time, I think you're, you're facing just an incredibly challenging retail environment. Like, like describe what was happening in, in the luggage business. I mean, we're this sort of mom and pop stores that you were depending on where they going out of business.

2 (47m 12s):
There were a number of closures. Absolutely. The specialty store segment of the market became challenged during the late nineties. And when the.com bubble burst, they were challenged even more and nine 11 was kind of the, the hammer that caused a number of them to either go out of business or to close their poor performing stores in order to focus on the better stores and survive. So yes, we went from probably having a six or 700 viable points of sale to, I would, I would suspect we'd lost maybe a third of those after nine 11.

1 (47m 46s):
Well, and I guess you felt like you needed to do something to shore up the cash situation. So I gather you eventually found a private equity firm there called Oak tree capital. They were interested in making an investment into me and, and they became a majority shareholder. And, and I'm assuming in 2002, they, they got a pretty good deal.

2 (48m 11s):
They got a great deal. They got a great deal. We needed the capital at the time. They did come in with a taking majority share of the company. The fact that I was a, the largest individual shareholder, you know, meant that I had a seat at the table with them. I was part of the board of directors, but I could no longer call the shots when it came to major decisions.

1 (48m 34s):
Was it the kind of investment from the looked for distressed companies?

2 (48m 38s):
They did. They looked, they looked for companies where they felt that they felt had a sound concept, a business concept, but for one reason or another were, were going through tough times and after nine 11, we certainly fit into that category.

1 (48m 52s):
Yeah. I'm trying to get getting your head at this time. Cause I, I would've thought if I'm, you kind of have no choice, you've got to take this in because you want to save the business. You want to save the jobs and you want to see if you could turn it around. So whether it was a good deal or not, and it sounds like it wasn't an ideal deal. You kinda, you kind of had to take it right.

2 (49m 12s):
Well, we had other PE companies that were interested, but most of them backed off because they were concerned about the potential for another terrorist attack. So Oak tree, Oak tree essentially presented the best offer that we had at the time. Right? And th they took a very strategic view of the business. Their, their sole job was to create value for their shareholders for their

1 (49m 33s):
To make money. Yes, sure. That's your job. There's not a charity.

2 (49m 37s):
They, and they, they were good strategists. They, they, there are a couple of young guys who engineered the deal were very smart, very capable. The difference between financial investors and other types of investors is that people are fungible. They were less interested in the value that different people brought to the parts of the business than they were. And getting down to what was a reasonable head count at a reasonable fixed costs for the business. Right. And I understand that there, the business isn't worth anything if it doesn't survive. So they brought, I think, sound business principles to the table. When we had those types of discussions,

1 (50m 15s):
You also had to tell your manufacturing partner in Georgia, that you were moving your operations to Asia, that you could no longer afford to manufacture in the U S

2 (50m 24s):
That was, was certainly extremely difficulty. David and Alad rice had been terrific partners and become friends. And we had to move to Asia for a number of reasons, one of which we had to improve our margins to give the, the company sufficient cashflow. And there was something we had to do for the sake of the business.

1 (50m 45s):
But I'm wondering, I mean, you're, you're talking about this in a very level headed way, and I think you are a very level headed, kind of, you know, rational thinker. I'm just surprised that there's no emotion here. I mean, this is your business. I mean, you created this, you started this from a peace Corps experience, and I'm just surprised that you you're not feeling any emotions about this. Cause I would, I would be, I don't know, kind of, kind of tied up a notch.

2 (51m 11s):
Well, this, this is 20 years after the event, guys. I'm sure there were various emotions at the time, but the first motion frankly, was appreciation of the fact that we were bringing somebody and that the company would live to fight another day and jobs were going to survive as the brand was survive. And I was optimistic about the future. I thought that, that we would, we would live in prosper and, and leave the, the agony of nine 11 behind us and that's. But in fact, what in fact happened,

1 (51m 42s):
I mean the travel business, it took some time for, to return, but it did return. Did you, did you start to see a steady uptake in sales? Pretty soon after that investment from Oak tree,

2 (51m 53s):
You did too. The brand was still very healthy. We did not succumb to the temptations of creating sales by any means during periods like that, when companies aren't a duress, often they will broaden their distribution or their run constant price promotions to the point that consumers might lose faith in what's what's this product really worth consistent pricing is, is very important if you're developing a premium brand. So we hadn't done anything to damage. The brand we'd held are held true to our values. And therefore as travel began to recover, people began having more confidence that security was a satisfactory sales, certainly be covered and began recovering in 2002, recovered more strongly in 2003 in 2004.

1 (52m 40s):
All right. So within two years of Oak tree becoming a majority shareholder, they get an offer from a British private equity firm to buy out to me reportedly for $276 million. So I think they probably did pretty well in their initial investment. How did you feel about, about selling at that time in 2004?

2 (53m 1s):
Well, they approached me in 2004 and said that, that they had people who were interested in the business. My first reaction was it's too early that we, we shouldn't be doing this, but they estimated that they would be able to get a large enough multiple, that they were very comfortable turning the business over quickly, selling out their stake and moving onto something else. That's the way P firms

1 (53m 24s):
Operate. And was it clear to you that it was time for you to leave at that point?

2 (53m 28s):
Yes, essentially the, the team that was involved with marketing the company would really have to be United and feeling that this was the best thing to do. And I was, they, they surmised correctly that I wasn't ready to do that,

1 (53m 41s):
But that was going to be it. I mean, 30 that's almost 30 years to the year, right? 29 years, June, 2004. I was it, you were out

2 (53m 50s):
Here, your math is right,

1 (53m 52s):
But you had, at one point you have 500 people working for you. You had people you knew in Europe, you had people you knew in Japan, you had all these specialty stores, you developed all these relationships. You'd invested all this time, getting to know people who believed in your product. And now like one day you go from just, you know, constant calls and emails and faxes to silence.

2 (54m 14s):
Well, you hit the nail on the head. There was more emotion involved with leaving in 2004 than there was bringing in a Oak tree in 2002, because in 2004, it was essentially closing the door. So quite a difference. And there was stomach churning and some soul searching, no, I wasn't ready to stop working. I still feel very positive about the company today, but it was time to move on to something else.

1 (54m 40s):
So meantime, you're no longer involved in to me. And that brand really, it goes from, you know, obviously being privately owned and private equity and different strategic iterations, it goes public. And I think at 2012 and it, it was valued at like over a billion dollars. I mean, I know you had no involvement at the time any more, but what did you think? I mean, as you, you're sort of completely out of that business, but all of a sudden, there's just this March throughout, you know, across cities around the world, you see too many stores opening left and right at airports and, you know, and, and, you know, sham, Sally's AOL, whoever, wherever, you know, I remember when in Georgetown, in Washington, DC, were you, were you paying any attention to that?

2 (55m 29s):
Well, I was certainly well aware of it. I was still traveling to Europe. There was honestly a feeling of pride at seeing the stores. I think they, they, they were, they were taking the brand and they were taking it to the next level and beyond, and I was very proud of having been part of the foundation of the early years and very happy to see that it was, was flourishing.

1 (55m 50s):
Yeah. I mean, did you, that's fine. I mean, they, I mean, the new owners essentially took this brand that you created and they really did kind of take it to the next level, right. As a luxury brand and, and they didn't, you know, they could have sort of cheapened it. Let's say, and, and, and you would see to me luggage at target and at, you know, at, at, at, at Filene's basement or wherever, you know, right. Like cut rate prices, but they didn't do that. They actually turned it into a super premium brand.

2 (56m 19s):
Well, private equity people are, are smart business people generally speaking a very smart business people. And I think they realized that Toomey's future was as a premium brand. The middle of the market's a tough playing field. There, there are a lot of people fighting for a share of the middle of the market. And I, you know, we looked upon it as no man's land. It's, there's some good brands there. There's some good companies there, but I think playing at the premium end of the market, and I think to me is not really luxury. It's still premium it's luxury perhaps for the luggage category. But as brands go, it's a, it's, it's a high-end brand and well-made and so on and so forth, but beautiful stores, but they've maintained the integrity of the product for the most part.

2 (57m 5s):
And I think the brand is still going very strong today.

1 (57m 7s):
It's owned by Samsonite today. They acquired it in 2016 as just, it's a bit of an irony I'm in the same company that was not interested in distributing it hitting the 90, early nineties is now the owner,

2 (57m 20s):
How the worm turns now. Yeah. So I, I wasn't shocked when Samsonite bought it, but it's not where I expected it would end up, I thought it would probably end up as part of one of the luxury houses, as opposed to a with Samsonite, which is basically a, a very broadly distributed. Brad.

1 (57m 40s):
Meanwhile, you had been doing consulting in the, in the luggage business during this time. And, and you were working with a guy who worked with you at, to me, he was an executive at, to me.

2 (57m 51s):
Yes. Larry lien. Larry was a came to me and said, look, I'm leaving to me. Perhaps we could do something together. And he worked with me for a number of years where we were consulting and distributing in the luggage and leather goods.

1 (58m 6s):
And I guess w like around 2015, what, like somebody kinged you guys with a new ideas, is that right?

2 (58m 13s):
Yes. Probably around 2015 or 16, we were approached by a couple of people, retailers that we knew who essentially had turned to manufacturing hardside luggage at America. And they approached me and they said, look, we've we think we've got a good product concept. It's high quality. We're making America, but we're having difficulty finding customers. And I understood completely what they were talking about. It was very difficult for a new brand to break in their product was high priced. We thought the design needs work. We thought it needed a new name. We've we basically told them that we thought that the, the traditional approach of selling through brick and mortar stores for a brand like theirs, that wasn't already, there was a very, very difficult road to follow.

2 (59m 4s):
And we basically said, if we're going to do this, we've got to focus on direct to consumer

1 (59m 9s):
W let me just, let me just understand this firmament. I mean this, so sometime in the mid two thousands, like mid 2000 tens, like 2012, 13, 14, 15, you started to see a very, very significant shift in luggage direct to consumer sort of the, not the upper range, but sort of below the two range right away suitcases. The classic example, we told that story on this show many years ago, they were their, their content marketing was really smart. They were, you know, their, their social media presence was great. They were, they were selling travel. They were selling the travel lifestyle. They weren't selling suitcases.

1 (59m 49s):
Did you, did you notice that, did you see that?

2 (59m 52s):
I began to notice them probably a six months to a year after they, after they had launched, they came out of nowhere. There were a couple of young women who did it, terrific marketing job. And they, as you said, they sold the lifestyle. They sold the travel adventure. They created an aspirational brand and they were targeting initially young millennials. You're right.

1 (1h 0m 17s):
So meantime, around that time, you were approached by two people who want to make luggage. And I should mention at this point, Charlie, you're in your seventies. And from what I understand from clearly what's what's happens is you decide, yeah, I'm going to jump into another entrepreneurial venture at this point in my life, which is awesome. But, but tell me how you were convinced that you wanted to do this.

2 (1h 0m 44s):
Well, it really was stepping back and looking at the marketplace during the, the nineties, to me, black on black luggage, mostly ballistic nylon had become really the travel uniform of a professionals, very broad market following. And it became very normal to see lots of TV. When you were traveling. I thought that there was room for a brand that essentially could produce a high end premium product. That would be quite different from what to me was doing rather than gearing our product for road warriors, who wanted to have a status piece of luggage that in this particular case, their boss might be caring.

2 (1h 1m 27s):
We were essentially hearkening back to the early days of, to me, we were looking for early adapters who were not afraid to adapt to new products and essentially try something new if it was good looking and well-made, and would essentially differentiate them, allowed them to stand out from the crowd.

1 (1h 1m 45s):
So basically you, you, you landed on this concept of, instead of just a, a, you know, we, we design what the suitcase looks like and sell it. You basically have a number of shapes of the, of different pieces of luggage, but, but you allow, would allow the consumer, the customer to design to basically choose the colors to the color of the suitcase, but not, not, not the entire space. They could choose different colors for different sides of the suitcase, the color of the fabrics, the zippers, the wheels it's sorta like build a bear, you know, like build a bear. But for suitcases, you don't build a bears.

2 (1h 2m 21s):
That's a good analogy. Yeah.

1 (1h 2m 23s):
Yeah. You can totally customize your stuffed animal. Right. So you, so, so this is a concept that really, I don't did it exist in, in luggage at all?

2 (1h 2m 33s):
It did not, not, not the way we're doing it. We allow our customers to personalize seven or eight elements and to, and we don't charge them extra for it.

1 (1h 2m 43s):
I should preface this by saying, customers really look at price, right. But you're going for a, sort of a more premium segment of the, of the market you offer total customization of a suitcase. And it's made in the U S in the very same place where you made the Tumi bags at the factory in Georgia, right?

2 (1h 3m 4s):
Yes. We've got an ideal situation where we've got the rice brothers who are two ways of original manufacturing partners. So that's a terrific outcome from my point of view. And we're able to do it in, in a way that allows us to have a reasonable price for the product. We're reducing the carbon footprint, because we're not shipping container loads of empty suitcases across the Pacific. Now we do source some components in Asia that are not available in the us, but whatever component we can source in the U S we do at the assembly takes place in and invite Alia, Georgia.

1 (1h 3m 38s):
I'm just curious to start a luggage company like this. How much Thomas you did, you have to raise, I mean, we're talking tens of millions of dollars

2 (1h 3m 45s):
Wished that we had tens of millions of dollars, but if not, you know, there's a, again, I think too much money too fast. Isn't necessarily good for our business, but no, we did not raise tens of millions of dollars. We bootstrapped the business. We made a decision early on that as much as we admired and appreciated what a way had done with their business is that we were going to grow at a reasonable pace. We did not want to be rushing from one round of, of capital raise to the next with, with venture capitalists away had a really media, you know, grew like, like a combat

1 (1h 4m 24s):
Meteoric rise. Yeah.

2 (1h 4m 26s):
But they, they brought in a lot of capital. They raised a couple million dollars and then they raised 10 million. Then they raised 50 million. Then they raised a hundred million and they create a tremendous valuation. And the, the early shareholders of have done very well. I'm sure, but growing a company too fast is a very risky proposition from a number of standpoints. So we were not going down that route and therefore bootstrapping made the most sense to us.

1 (1h 4m 52s):
So you launched this company and, and I think in, in 2019, you start to hit some, you get some traction, but, but, and you know, and you're not going to be a market leader soon, but I, from what I had gathered in 2019, you're getting a little bit of traction and things start to look pretty cool and interesting. And then like a great entrepreneur, Charlie, you've got one more crisis in you at least one more crisis in you because that is what you need in life. And the crisis is COVID. And once again, the, a massive disruption to the travel industry, the biggest disruption since the previous one that you'd already experienced after nine 11. I mean, I mean, I'm, I gotta be thinking, if I'm you, at this point, I gotta be looking up at the heavens and say, God, what are you, are you, I mean, are you just trying to torture me again?

1 (1h 5m 43s):
It's like your job and you're looking up and you're saying, what did I do to deserve this?

2 (1h 5m 49s):
Well, talk about being blindsided. I certainly nobody saw that company. The impact of, of, of the pandemic was more that I don't say this lightly. It was more than the impact of nine 11 and the financial crisis of 2007 and eight put together. It was more than that put together. They traveled the street, came to a screeching halt and sales dropped by 60, 70, 80, 90%. I think the month of April DTC brands publicly announced that their sales were down by 90% from one wants to the next.

2 (1h 6m 30s):
So you go into a survival mode again, fortunately, we did not have a lot of fixed expenses. We were able to make adjustments in our variable span. We curtailed our advertising big time, as you would imagine, we focused on the product. We focused on making the product better. And we made a number of improvements to the product during this period, small things that many of which the consumer would notice, but essentially make, make the product increasingly better.

1 (1h 6m 58s):
So w w what did you do differently? I mean, of course after nine 11 year team five, or people new are much leaner now. And presumably, you know, you, you, because you'd been through this, what did you know about how to weather this pandemic situation? You must have learned things in previous crises. So what gave you confidence and what did you do rather that, that helped you kind of weather the storm?

2 (1h 7m 26s):
Well, the confidence comes or the fact that, that, that you're right, I've been through at least four crisis is four major crisis is the confidence that the market will come back. And we also, we're confident that we would continue to fund the business and we would be standing when, when people began to travel again. So that enables you to look at the numbers, which were depressing because we are, while we continue to book product and make and ship product, the numbers were, were, were much lower than we expected during 2020 and 2021. The second part of 2021, the market has become healthier month by month, but we're still not where we would have been if the pandemic had not come along.

1 (1h 8m 7s):
You know, I love that, that you really have been thinking in an innovative way, over the course of your career, you know, from the leather duffels to the, you opening to the ballistic material. Now a completely customizable suitcase. What, what is, what is going to be w what's success to you? Like what has to happen for you to say, yep, we did it with Rome. It's successful. Is it, is it, is it when it becomes a a hundred million dollar business? Is it because is it when it's, I don't know, ubiquitous, like, to me, what, what, w how would you define that

2 (1h 8m 41s):
When Tumi was established back in 1975, to think that it would become in my lifetime? I think our, our peak year was 140 plus million, and now it's over 500 million that would not have been part of my, my game plan. I would have not have dared to dream that we could create a, a brand that was that large and that important. So where can roam go like a $50 million hundred million dollar brand? Absolutely no question about it, but I think we'll, I'll start to feel that we have created a sustainable brand when the buzz begins. People are coming to us saying that they'd discovered us not through the press, but, but a friend of theirs recommended roam, peer reviews and referrals by friends.

2 (1h 9m 29s):
I think that's the real mark of a brand coming of age that that's, what's going to just put the brand on the map.

1 (1h 9m 37s):
Charlie, when you think about your entire journey, your whole career, I mean, you, you, you, you built an iconic brand. I mean, you, you created an iconic brand to me is, and every airport, and I didn't want to use nose suitcases have seen it as a, it's a great brand name. And now, you know, you've got Rome and, and all the things that you've done in, in that time, how much of, of, of the success that you've had, do you attribute to the hard work, the skills that you brought and how much do you think ha has to do or had to do with just luck, getting lucky, finding the right partners, meeting the right people, getting a lucky break here and there.

2 (1h 10m 15s):
Well, I think, I think we've had plenty of luck along the way. Guy. I think that, you know, beating the right people, bearing the right woven, hiring the right people, or being lucky enough to be exposed to talent, that there is an art and a science to hiring people, I think would be the best way to express it. And part of that art involves luck. We were lucky to meet the rice brothers and Savannah. Larry Lee was a stroke of luck. If I hadn't attended that industry event, I'd never would have met Larry. So I think that if an entrepreneur or a business person always wants to be the smartest person in the room, I think their, their opportunities are limited.

2 (1h 10m 57s):
I always took great pleasure in being able to find people who had different skillsets and were smarter in the areas that they were strong with than I was. I think that that's how you get one-on-one and come up with three

1 (1h 11m 10s):
That's Charlie, Clifford, the co-founder of, to me and Rome, Charlie, I'm telling you your next marketing push it's like build a bear just for luggage. What do you think?

2 (1h 11m 23s):
I suggested that as a headline guy.

1 (1h 11m 25s):
Yeah. Yeah. Just try not beta test it.

2 (1h 11m 27s):
I'll present it to the marketing committee. If I presented it would be if they get declined, but Alvar presented his guy's idea.

1 (1h 11m 37s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app.

2 (1h 11m 41s):
So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact the team. Our email address is H I B T, and id.wondery.com. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Roz on Instagram. We're at how I built this and I'm at guy dot Ross. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with music composed by rum teen era bluey. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Josh lash, Alex Chun, Carrie Thompson, Catherine cipher, Elaine coats, John Isabella, Christmasy, Sini, and Karla STOs.

2 (1h 12m 24s):
I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. Hey, everyone. So I want to make sure you know, all of the different ways you can listen to how I built this. As you probably know, you can follow the show on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now, but a one let you know that you can actually listen to the next episode of how I built this today. One week early on Amazon music, you can also listen to it early and ad free by subscribing to Wondery plus an apple podcasts or on the Wondery app.

1 (1h 13m 14s):
Please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. And another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks.