0 (0s):
If your finance team is stuck doing mundane, transactional tasks, they can help scale your company's growth. Enter. Tipalti the world's most comprehensive payable system that lets you focus on success visits <inaudible> dot com to see how that's tip a L T i.com. Tipalti it's smart payables.

2 (24s):
If you walk into any type of liquor store, if you walk into any restaurant, any back bar and you ask them a very simple question, tell me what whiskey or bourbon is on your back bar. That represents someone who is not a white male and just wait. Wow. White males represent 30% of this country at a hundred percent of the whiskeys up until uncle nearest 100%

3 (60s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross and on the show today, how fun Weaver stumbled onto a piece of Southern history that she couldn't forget and built a brand around it. Uncle nearest premium whiskey, one of the fastest growing whiskey brands in the country. This is not a business show or at least I don't think of it that way. This show is about stories. It just so happens that every business is a story.

3 (1m 43s):
Now think about that for a moment. It may not make immediate sense. After all a business is about selling a product or a service in exchange for money or goods, but a business, especially a consumer-facing business is also about the question. Why, why did you decide to pursue this idea? Why do you think the world needs to hear about it? Why does it add value to someone's life in each of these answers? It's a story. It's what connects you and me and everyone out there to the thing you're building. So how is it that Fon Weaver best known for her books on marriage is now the founder of one of the fastest growing whiskey brands in the U S how is it that fun of black woman with no background in distilling managed to break into a largely white male dominated industry spirits and win every conceivable award for her product.

3 (2m 45s):
And how did she do all of this in just five years? Now that's a story and it actually begins more than 150 years ago. In Lynchburg, Tennessee, a young apprentice worked in a whiskey distillery named Jack Daniel met a master distiller named nearest green. Everyone called him uncle nearest, nearest was a black man, formerly enslaved. And it was nearest who took young Jack under his wing and showed him how to distill Tennessee whiskey. And of course out of that relationship came one of the best known whiskey brands in the world, Jack Daniels, but only a few people knew the name of the man who had helped it come about.

3 (3m 31s):
Now, Fon Weaver. First heard about this story. When she read an article in the New York times, several years ago, it intrigued her so much. She decided to investigate it more deeply after all, she was already a published author and she thought maybe there's a book to be written or even a movie, but on a whim, she ended up buying an old farm in Lynchburg, the farm where uncle nearest had taught Jack Daniel, how to distill. And eventually she decided to distill her own brand of whiskey. She would call it uncle nearest. And today it's one of the very few independently owned whiskey brands in America. And as I mentioned earlier, one of the fastest growing, but the journey to building her brand was filled with landmines.

3 (4m 18s):
For starters, Fon had to convince investors that the Jack Daniels brand wouldn't try and quash her idea. And then she had to figure out how to get her bottles on the shelves of liquor stores across the country. Not an easy task when virtually every major spirit brand is owned by one of the five big multinational liquor companies. But once you understand fond story, it becomes clear that nothing was going to stand in her way. Fon grew up in Pasadena, California. Her dad was a producer and songwriter for Motown records.

2 (4m 55s):
He was one of the very first hit makers before Motown. Wow. He was there from the beginning. So he's credited with Diana Ross and the Supreme and the temptations and the four tops and Michael Jackson. And, and just really from the beginning, smokey Robinson, then when Stevie came in and, and so that was sort of his world. And in 75, I believe it was either while my mother was pregnant with me or, or shortly before my father decided not to sign another contract with Motown. Now, understanding the, the picture is my dad is in this huge house on the top of Hollywood hill, all the fancy cars, everybody would come to the parties.

2 (5m 39s):
Everybody would come to the parties that he through. And he decides that he really truly does believe God is calling him to move away from Motown and to move away from that industry and to go into ministry. Wow. And so I'm born into a period of training

3 (6m 2s):
When he is transitioning from being a songwriter. And I should mention from what I understand, he co-wrote, he's a co-writer and he's credited on the songs castles in the sand. The Stevie wonder song, love child by the Supreme. I mean, major, major hits for Motown.

2 (6m 20s):
Absolutely. Absolutely. He was a really, really, really big deal producer top of his game. And he decides to completely leave no backup plan and really not enough money in the bank to be able to continue to live the life he was living for very long, when you're living a lifestyle, like he was big glass house at the top of Hollywood Hills, that consumption rate, that consumption rate is really, really high. And so they had to downsize, they had to downgrade. I think that there was a part of him that did not want people to know that there were financial challenges.

2 (7m 3s):
And so we lived in a world that was a bit split, but it was very interesting growing up in this dynamic because you had all of these celebrities coming, everybody in Motown, my father became their pastors of sorts. So he goes into the ministry, but he still begins to bring everyone with him. So smokey and Stevie and, and Eddie Kendricks and all these different folks are at the house all the time.

3 (7m 30s):
I mean, was that whereas like, like all these celebrities would be coming in and out, cause your dad basically became their pastor. They,

2 (7m 37s):
And so for all of them, they were auntie and uncle to me, all of them. And that's the world that I knew, but I didn't know my father as any sort of celebrity. And I actually didn't know these people as celebrities. Right? I knew these people as normal people with normal problems coming into our home to be ministered to more than anything. That's what I knew when I grew up. I only knew him as a minister. And what was your

3 (8m 7s):
Relationship like with your mom and dad? Were they strict? Were they

2 (8m 12s):
Very contentious? Very contentious. My mom and I, we can laugh about it now, but it wasn't funny back then is I'd say that we were, we were their pastor's Guinea pigs, because anything that the pastor or the leadership of the church said, this is how you should raise your children. They did it. And it is the hot mess.

3 (8m 31s):
What did that mean for you? Like, as a teenager, you were really restricted in

2 (8m 35s):
Restricted in everything. There was, it was incredibly, I mean, we are Christian, but could not wear pants as girls because there is a scripture that says, mention, not wear anything pertaining to women. Women should not wear anything pertaining to men. And their pastor took that to mean women should not wear pants. So imagine me as a teenager and it's winter time, and I'm trying to explain why I'm in skirts. It was not a fun upbringing for me, for sure. And the way that I've been wired from day one day one is to challenge everything. I came out of the womb, challenging everything. I came out of the womb saying,

3 (9m 15s):
No, you were, you were a kid who clearly, we're just waiting for the moment when you could leave and own.

2 (9m 26s):
From the time I was five, I was trying to pack bags. Yeah, no doubt about it. I actually left home at 15. Wow. And my, my mom said she, she still remembers the day I walked down the driveway and she watched me leaving with a backpack and a lunch pail in hand. And that was basically all I had was a backpack and a lunch bail. And I was like, I'm out of here. And so it wasn't a big blowout fight or anything of that nature. I just said, this, this won't work for me.

3 (9m 53s):
How long were you away

2 (9m 55s):
For the rest of my life?

3 (9m 57s):
Hmm. Do you think from your parents' perspective, they kind of wrote you off as our last child at that time?

2 (10m 5s):
I do. I do. I don't think that they loved me any less. I don't think that they ever stopped loving me, but I think it's difficult not to write a child off who has made it very, very clear. They don't want to be parented. Wow. I don't know. I've actually never had a conversation with them about it because the one thing about how I am wired and it's, I think probably one of my greatest strengths is I don't go backwards.

3 (10m 35s):
So after leaving home, I, I guess you started living independently and even spent a few years in, in, in shelters and homeless shelters. Right?

2 (10m 44s):
I did. I went to a place called covenant house. It's a homeless shelter for adults in Hollywood. And it was probably one of the most important moments of my life because I'd always been independent and at covenant house, the way that they have it set up, it's absolutely brilliant. I think it's one of the most amazing transition places that has ever been created for, for people that were in situations like mine. And they have counselors that are set up that basically you go out, you get a job, you come back, you bring the paychecks, they save all of your money for you.

2 (11m 27s):
So you're not having to do any of that. You literally just turn over the checks, they save it for you. And then once you get to a certain amount and you can go out and get your own apartment, that's what you do.

3 (11m 37s):
I'm trying to wrap my head around this idea that, I mean, because moving into a homeless shelter, you know, especially for a kid who had a home, right, where everything was provided for you is a, is a radical step to take, even for a teenager. When, you know, let's be honest, our judgment is, is as a little bit different when we're teenagers than it is when we're adults, but still a radical move.

2 (11m 60s):
Yeah. I think my, my life has, has been marked by radical division. I, you know, I look back at that time and if I could do it all over again, I would've done it the exact same way. And I gained a freedom by living in the homeless shelters. I thrived in them. And I think that is in part, not because there weren't rules and I love rules. I live my life by rules, but I have to understand and agree with those rules and the rules in the homeless shelters made complete sense to me.

2 (12m 41s):
Hmm.

3 (12m 41s):
And I mean, you obviously got an incredible grounding there. Cause I read that at like the age of 18, you actually started your own business at 18. Yeah,

2 (12m 51s):
Yeah, yeah. It happened a little more serendipitous than that. I was an intern for an African-American PR firm in Los Angeles, the woman who owned it, pat Tobin, very, very, very popular a publicist. And I don't even remember how I met her actually, but she brought me in, I was in as an intern and they were working on a bunch of a different accounts and there were these two accounts that they were working on and I had radically different ideas about how to garner PR for these two particular companies.

2 (13m 35s):
So the way they were thinking about PR is you send out a press release and you see who picks it up and you, you pitch the story. And I was looking at PR as something that was fully experiential, something that was literally interwoven into other things. So now what they would call that is brand integration, but at the time that didn't really exist. And so, you know, brand placements and things of that nature that wasn't something happening in the early nineties, but it was how I was looking at how you garner earned media. And so for these two accounts, I had come up with a plan and it was so unfamiliar to the way that they did business, but the two clients absolutely loved the pitch.

2 (14m 21s):
And so pat said run with it, you know, and, and, and keep in mind. So I I'm about to turn 45. And if you put side-by-side pictures up of me at 18 and 45, I do not look that which I'm very happy about now, but I looked very mature at that age. So I w I did not come across in any way, shape or form as an 18 year old. And after I successfully did a few of the integrations that I had suggested both of the clients said to me individually, if you ever decide to start your own PR firm, we'll come with you. Well, that's how it began. So I began at 18 with two clients paying me $5,000 a month, which that's not a lot of money now, but I know for an 18 year old, that was pretty significant.

2 (15m 7s):
Right. Yeah.

3 (15m 8s):
And so what kind of PR were you doing? I mean, who are your clients?

2 (15m 12s):
Yeah, one is a, a painter by the name of Thomas Blackshear. And the other was a company called daddy long legs. They did those dolls with the hanging legs.

3 (15m 23s):
And what what'd you do? Would you like call newspapers and magazines and trade publications and try to play

2 (15m 28s):
Articles? I would do that, but I would also integrate it in events. And so I remember for instance, with Thomas Black shirt, there was a, a big Hollywood bowl event that was going to be with a bunch of jazz artists. And remember, I knew all these people from growing up, right. The music world was very easy for me to touch. And so I'd pick up the phone and call them directly and say, Hey, this is, this is what I'm doing. What are you thinking? And again, people weren't getting paid for product placement, right. And that wasn't even a thing. So me going in and saying, Hey, can I place these products? They're like, sure.

3 (16m 8s):
I want to put them. So you would, you would just like place these dolls or the paint, his paintings at events.

2 (16m 13s):
Yeah. The sculptures, the paintings. And, and so for instance, this Hollywood bowl event completely sold out and, and it was just a bunch of incredible jazz artists. And so throughout the venue, there were things related specifically where all the artists were the green room and, and all of that, that's where it was being introduced. Well, that journalists and those, those folks were coming into interview, the artists will all around the room are things related to Thomas Blackshear. So that was naturally going to end up being a part of the story because it was everywhere. That was essentially my PR plan.

3 (16m 51s):
Wow. All right. So you're running this PR firm for a few years. And was it just you running it?

2 (16m 57s):
No. So this is why my PR firm failed it. Wasn't just me. So what I, what I understood was, you know, how to get clients and how to do this integration and how to do all these things. What I did not understand. And I think this kind of comes back to what we were talking about before, where there was, you know, my father and mother were majorly downgrading, but didn't want anyone to know they were downgrading. So they still had this very big persona, even though they didn't have a lot. Well, that was me in business. So I hired a ton of people. And, and, and so I could have grown that thing pretty big, but where I got in trouble was this whole larger persona than what it was.

2 (17m 41s):
And so I hired far too many people for what was needed at that time and ran out of money. No one really knew I having my company was having these financial challenges. I knew that there was only a matter of time before it would fold, but nobody else really knew that. And let's just say, I do business different now, by the way. So

3 (18m 0s):
I think after about five years, few entertainment folded it. And yeah. Basically folded because it, you ran into money.

2 (18m 7s):
Yeah. It was like a young, a young girl figuring it out in real time.

3 (18m 12s):
But I mean, you've clearly made some good contacts over those years in NPR. Cause I think you, you were able to pivot into the restaurant business and, and you, you had gone to help launch a pretty high end restaurant called G Garvin's and then, and then you stayed in the industry for several years, right? Yeah. Meantime, during, around this time or early two thousands, I think you met Keith Weaver, the, the man eventually married. And the story I heard was that you met him through his mom, his mother who owned a salon, a hair salon.

3 (18m 53s):
Yeah.

2 (18m 54s):
I was going to her and you know, the thing that happens in a lot of African-American hair salons and barbershops is there's just a lot to talk. There were two conversations in, in the, in the hair salon. And there were probably about 20 stylists. It was either gossip or it was key's mother talking about how amazing her son is. He's four conversations going on. And there was one particular week that I went in and I would go in weekly to get my hair done. And she said, you know, I've been watching you all these weeks, come in here. And it's amazing that you're so young and you're so smart and you're so business-minded, and she literally re puts her head on over mine and says, you have to meet my son.

2 (19m 43s):
And I very quickly pivoted the conversation. But after that moment, she was re listless. And at the time he was a vice president for Sony pictures and full

3 (19m 57s):
She's. Like my son was in vice president, Sony pictures. I want you to meet him. And was it an instant match when you met him

2 (20m 5s):
Immediately? Well, so I get this phone call on myself and I just started laughing and I said, this must be the second coming. And he just fell out laughing immediately. And he's like, you've been talking to my mother. I said, I have. And so we started off with a great deal of laughter. And so we're getting to the end of the conversation. And, and I had had an ongoing prayer with God that I still have to this day that I called my box me in prayer. And I'll use it for large decisions even for this day, which is, you know, if this is not for me close this door in a way that I can't even open. And if it is for me open the door and in a way that no man can close.

2 (20m 46s):
And so then it, it a little easy for me to make decisions. I mean, it's a scary prayer to pray because you're now taking yourself out of it. But that, that was my prayer. Then it still is my prayer on big decisions now. And so we finally met for the first time, May 9th, 2003, he proposed on September 6th, we were married on December 27th, same year. Wow.

3 (21m 11s):
I think around this time, you, you kind of also pivoted once again, in your career, you'd worked at as a manager in the hotel industry at some, some pretty top hotels. And then I think around 2010, you started to write as a, as a freelance writer. And I really came out of a, I guess, a blog you started maybe on a whim, which is called happy wives club. Yeah. What, what's the story?

2 (21m 38s):
Yeah. I didn't even know it was a blog, but yes, I called it just a website. Cause I wasn't actually blogging on it. I introduced who I was and said, I want to find a million women around the world who are just like me, who are not represented in the media who are not represented, whose marriage, it doesn't look anything like desperate Housewives, real Housewives or all of these books that are now popping up that are, you know, really berating men. And, and so I said, I know that there are other otherwise out there, like me who have amazing husbands who support them, who love them, who are not characatures. And I said, I'm going to start a club for women like me and I'm going to call it and just like literally paused for a second.

2 (22m 21s):
And I said, I know what I'm going to call it. I'm going to call it the happy wives club. And so I emailed it to one of my sisters and three of my girlfriends who I knew had similar marriages. And then they sent it out. And within four weeks I had people who had signed up from 20 different countries. So

3 (22m 39s):
You essentially become a writer with this blog. And at some point clearly it attracts the attention of a literary agent or publisher because someone asks you to write a book about the secrets to great marriage.

2 (22m 53s):
Yeah. The irony is, as I had always written writing for me is cathartic to this day, the happy wives club wasn't actually initially anywhere on my radar in terms of writing about it. And, but when they made the suggestion, I told my literary agent and I said, well, I've always wanted to travel the world. So how about I go to all seven continents and I interview couples happily married 25 years or more and deduce the common denominator. So that began my journey of finding couples. And so I would reach into people that I knew that lived in other countries and ask that exact same question. And they would always point me to that one couple in the community that everyone knows is a true, true happily married.

2 (23m 38s):
It's not for the sh it's not for, well at that time, there wasn't even really Instagram. So it wasn't for the gram there. And I did, I went and I, I traveled, I traveled the world.

3 (23m 50s):
So, I mean, you have this phase in your, in your life where you had had a range of different experiences and have these bestselling books. And the story from where I understand the story is, and it's more or less, you know, probably an oversimplification, but you're on vacation in Asia. You read an article in the New York times about Jack Daniel's the whiskey brand that they discovered or found out or, or, or disclose that actually Jack Daniel, the person who is the distiller learned how to make whiskey from a black man named nearest green or, or uncle nearest as he was known.

3 (24m 32s):
What do you remember thinking after you read that article?

2 (24m 35s):
I remember first and foremost, the photo is, so what I see is this photo of, of Jack Daniel, and a lot of people saw it and immediately began wondering who is this black man to the right of Jack. But what I saw when I saw that photo was something, a little different, which was Jack Daniel, the most famous whiskey maker of all time was taking a photo with his team. And he had seated the center position to the

3 (25m 8s):
Black man. That's what you notice immediately, immediately

2 (25m 12s):
Because everyone else around Jack is white. This was his, his leadership team, if you will. And, and the question was, is this nearest green, this story that had been floating around Lynchburg Tennessee for so long about this African-American formerly enslaved man, who was the teacher of Jack Daniel, is this him? That was the question that people were asking, but the headline was Jack Daniels embraces a hidden ingredient, help from a slave. And I remember my eyes got wide as saucers, and I know that because Keith sitting across from me panics, and I literally flip the paper around to him and he's like, you've got to be kidding.

2 (25m 56s):
And, you know, for, for us, as African-Americans, until that point in our lives, there was no brand that was like a quintessential American brand that was known around the world that was able to be pinpointed to an African-American being there in the beginning. And that, that newspaper article flipped everything upside down because I read it and thought, how is it possible that this black man could have been so important? And none of us know about it.

3 (26m 38s):
Were you just, just as an aside, were you at that point, a whiskey drinker, like, cause there are people who are super into whiskey as there are people who are super into wine and beer, like was whiskey a thing for you?

2 (26m 50s):
Whiskey was my drink of choice, specifically bourbon, high proof and neat.

3 (26m 56s):
So this article spoke to you on multiple levels, not just the story of a, of a black man who essentially invented Jack Daniels, but, but as a whiskey drinker,

2 (27m 6s):
Yeah, it speaks to me, not because it was whiskey, it speaks to me because it was a ubiquitous American brand known around the world that it was very possible that a black man was at the very beginning of it. Right. And so I began looking into the story even more and I got on Amazon and I ordered Jack Daniel's legacy. It was a biography by a local journalist out of Tuscaloosa, Alabama, who goes to Lynchburg, Tennessee to write the authoritative biography on the most famous whiskey maker in the world. And very early on into the book, it introduces this white preacher and distiller who Jack came to work for him as a chore boy and nearest green was working the still at that time, this preacher, according to this biography says that he introduces Jack to, to nearest by saying, this is uncle narrows.

2 (28m 4s):
He's the best whiskey maker that I know of. And then every page, it was either nears green or his sons, Eli green and George Green. I mean, they were very, very prominent in terms of mentioned in this book. And they were mentioned more times than Jack's owned family. So this was

3 (28m 23s):
Known, this was known for

2 (28m 25s):
A long, well known. Yeah, this was not, this was it's the worst kept secret. If it was supposed to, it was never suppose to be a secret. And that's what I realized when I read his biography is as, at that time, you know, what the internet does, they take an article, they turn the headline into clickbait and then everybody makes an assumption. So all around the internet at that time was that they very quick, quickly determined that Jack was the slave owner that he stole the recipe hidden nearest and all these other things while I'm reading this biography and going not a chance because I believed that it was a story of love honor and respect,

3 (29m 7s):
And it really does spark something in you to the point where a few months later you decide, maybe there's a book here, like maybe I can do something deeper, like maybe, and maybe I need to go to visit like the source of this to go to Lynchburg, Tennessee. This was five years ago, I think, roughly,

2 (29m 27s):
But it was actually, let me tell you, it was, it was five years ago, yesterday, five years ago yesterday. And my poor husband, every time I have an idea for what I want to do for my birthday. He's like, oh boy, I'm going to brace myself. And for that year, what I want it for my 40th birthday was to go dive into this story. He calls it my, my rabbit holes. And so this to him was a rabbit hole that we were just going to go into for four days, but we will come back

3 (29m 54s):
And maybe it would result in, in, in, in more thinking about a book or a film or maybe not. But the idea was you would go down to Lynchburg and just kind of check it out from what I understand, Keith didn't want to go and park as the name Lynch is in Lynchburg. And obviously,

2 (30m 12s):
I mean, and, and understandably, understandably, so he did not want to go to a town with Lynch in the name as a California boy. And who's African-American, that is not what he would do intentionally, not in the south, but he did go. And, and we were there for a very short period of time where, you know, talk about a life of serendipitous things and just sort of following those paths. We were in the library top of the morning, and we're just, we're trying to find anything on the story and we can't find anything. And so I, I asked the, the assistant librarian comes over and asks how she can help. And I told her what we were looking to do. And she said, well, let me go call my director.

2 (30m 52s):
And she calls the director a long story short, the director then calls who is Jack's eldest descendant. And if, if you think about, and, and I understand it as well, this is a very small town. Their family has officially been drug through the mud because people concluded that they were slave owners in hid the original recipe maker and all the rest of this stuff. And so Jack's eldest descendant. She walked through the door of the library and when I looked at her, I could visibly see,

3 (31m 28s):
She thought you were coming to further, you know, go after her family's name. When you

2 (31m 34s):
Have

3 (31m 35s):
That, maybe yeah.

2 (31m 36s):
A black couple author and a movie person from LA comes to Lynchburg, Tennessee to do research on the story that everybody online has already made a determination about

3 (31m 47s):
That this is a very cut and dry story. Jack Daniel had a slave forced this man to make whiskey than stole the recipe and then took credit for it. That was the narrative. Exactly. And Shelly was under the impression that you are going to further, you know, pursue that narrative.

2 (32m 4s):
Yeah, I would imagine. So I would have been under that impression as well,

3 (32m 8s):
But, but actually the, the narrative that, that you had learned was very different that, that Jack Daniel did not own slaves, that nearest was a mentor to him. And that the Daniel family actually acknowledged that, that they credited nearest for his role as, as a whiskey maker.

2 (32m 27s):
Yeah. And I said to her, I need you to understand, I am not here to harm your family's legacy. I am here because I believe that this is actually a story of love, honor and respect. And I think that social media has this wrong. I think media has it wrong. I think that there was a relationship here that deserves to be explored and shared. I write stories on love, and that is the story I'm here to find. And she said, well, in that case, I want to help you. And she pulls out her cell phone and she gives me names and number to near screens, descendants. They all grew up together.

2 (33m 8s):
They were friends. They ate around the same dinner table.

3 (33m 10s):
Cool. And they were still there in Lynchburg, Tennessee, the descendants of Jack Daniel, the descendants of uncle nearest. They're all there.

2 (33m 19s):
They're all there. They're

3 (33m 20s):
Still still there. And while you're there, you find out that actually somebody says, oh, by the way, the original distillery where the two of them made whiskey, you should go check it out. And I think it's for sale.

2 (33m 36s):
It was her that told me, so we're in the library. We were not there very long. And she said, Hey, you know that book that brought you here, that farm where Jack grew up and all this stuff happened in the book it's for sale. And her cousin then calls me about an hour and a half later, maybe two hours later and says, you met my cousin at the library. She says, you want to go see the Dan call farm. I'm a realtor. I can take you. Would you like me to take you tomorrow? And so I've not spoken to anyone from nearest his family, but have now had contact with two people from Jack's family. And I've only been there a few hours. So

3 (34m 13s):
You go and see it. And what do you, what do you make of it? I mean, was it in disrepair? Was it was an old red farmer.

2 (34m 19s):
W well, you drive up to this farm and there's cows everywhere. So the current owners that had purchased it in the early sixties, they were dairy farmers. And so the whole property were cows and in different structures to maintain this dairy farm. And so you, you go through all of this and then you finally kind of get up the hill a little bit. And I will say that Keith and I were not through the door for longer than five minutes before we looked at each other and said, we're buying this place

3 (35m 1s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Fon realizes that the best way to honor the story of nearest green is not with a book, but with a bottle, actually many bottles of Tennessee whiskey stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this Support for this podcast. And the following message come from ZipRecruiter. ZipRecruiter knows there are some things in life. You want to pick yourself a cut of steak, a mattress. So why not do the same thing for hiring ZipRecruiter sends you qualified candidates for your job and allows you to easily invite top choices to apply, go to ziprecruiter.com/b U I L T to try ZipRecruiter today.

0 (35m 52s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that's successful. Financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy, flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

3 (36m 23s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2016 and Fon Weaver and her husband, Keith have made a huge decision to buy and restore the 300 acre farm where nearest green Jack, Daniel, how to make whiskey

2 (36m 42s):
Most important part was the second floor was an absolute time capsule. So the room where Jack stayed in there was walls with barrels, done, souls that you could still very visibly read. And so it was so easy for us to go. We don't know what we're going to do with this, but this is a piece of American history, and we're going to restore it and figure it out later,

3 (37m 7s):
This was Jack Daniels. This was his home. This was his farm.

2 (37m 11s):
This was his, yeah. This is where he worked as a chore boy and where he lived with the other boys.

3 (37m 16s):
So in your mind at that, when you made the offer on the property, it sounds like maybe in your mind you were thinking, this will be part of the book. You know, the part of the book story will be me buying this place and restoring this amazing place and telling the story of uncle nearest. And maybe there'll be a film.

2 (37m 35s):
I wish I could tell you. I had that kind of foresight. I looked at that really truly purely as a, as a real estate play and that we could restore this property and put this on the national historic registry. Like there, there was a lot there, but maybe a couple of days later is when, what came to mind is that I could do my research from there. You could actually

3 (38m 0s):
Live there and be steeped in that place.

2 (38m 3s):
Exactly. And my thought process was when I walk the grounds of, of plantations, I, it's very diff it's very rare for me to go onto a plantation because I walk the grounds and I can literally feel the spirit of those harms on those plantation grounds. But when I walked across this farm, the Dan call farm, I got no such feeling. It was absolute and complete peace. And so I did the research from there. The story would truly come because I would be among their spirits.

3 (38m 38s):
Dan call, we should mention was the, he was a preacher and distiller. This was the guy that Jack Daniel went to work for originally.

2 (38m 45s):
Yeah. And, and the irony is, is both the church and the distillery were on his property and his distillery and his church we're on the furthest points for the most part. And so he lived a world in which these two were very separate. And then he married a woman who was a Teetotaller who wanted nothing to do with him having a distillery. So she did not want him to be doing that. And so the reason why nearest green is credited as the first known African-American master distiller is because he fully turned over the steel to nearest. But I think that had everything to do with the fact that his church and his wife were really pushing against him, having it all together.

3 (39m 28s):
It was 2016. When you buy the place you permanently relocate to, to Tennessee, from LA to any of your friends, say like, what are you guys doing? What are you nuts?

2 (39m 40s):
No, because it was so remarkable. The way things unfolded, the, the, the realtor who helped us. So this is, you know, Jack's lineage, as it turns out, as we continue doing the research and I'm bringing my research into the property, she comes to me and she says, Hey, you know, I know you are, you're focused on a book and a movie, but if you ever decide to honor nearest with a bottle, I'll come out of retirement to make sure you get it right. Well, she was in the family business for 31 years when she left Jack Daniel distillery, she was their head of whiskey operations. That just the serendipitous nature of every aspect and element that has happened.

2 (40m 25s):
You could not convince me that this is completely natural, that there's, I've been convinced from very early on that there was something supernatural at play here. And so when I would share with our friends and family, the different things that had happened since we arrived in Lynchburg, no one had any question whatsoever that we were to complete this mission. No one. Wow.

3 (40m 51s):
Okay. So you are fully in Tennessee, meantime, you're learning all these new things through your research about uncle nearest and about his legacy. And it's clear you are. You're not quite sure how, but you are going to help to preserve his legacy somehow and celebrate it. One of the things that you decided to do was to actually produce a commemorative bottle of whiskey.

2 (41m 17s):
That's what it was supposed to be was it was a singular commemorative bottle. That's what it was

3 (41m 23s):
Supposed to be. Was this an idea that you had, like, let me just do this for fun, or how did it come up?

2 (41m 28s):
I had looked into it and had frankly concluded that it was going to way too much money. And it was going to be an absolute headache to try to do a whiskey brand because of how costly it was going to be to do it. And so the idea of having to go out and to raise money from people, I was not excited about. I hadn't raised money in a very long time. Fun.

3 (41m 51s):
I mean, how much was it going to cost you to just make 500 commemorative bottles or something?

2 (41m 55s):
Well, originally with the commemorative bottles, you know, maybe a million or so dollars because it's not just a matter of making the bottles. You'd also still have to market it. This is a, it's a very crowded field. So distributors are not going to pick you up. If you cannot show that you have an ability to get people to buy it. That means that you have to show them a marketing plan and you have to show them the money you're going to put behind the marketing plan. You we're, we're a three tier system, the alcohol businesses, which means that you can't get it to the shelves without a distributor, even the stuff that people order online, whether it's reserved bar or any of the other ones, they're still going through a distributor. So if no distributor will pick you up, you don't have a product to sell it.

3 (42m 40s):
I was like making a commemorative bottle is, is a waste of time because nobody's going to distribute something that's never going to come out again.

2 (42m 47s):
Hence why I moved away from the idea altogether is because to do it is to basically set yourself up for failure,

3 (42m 54s):
Right? You couldn't just make a one-off it's impossible

2 (42m 57s):
To do,

3 (42m 57s):
Which is interesting. Cause you, you can do that with wine. You know, I've I know people who, who buy some wine and put it in bottles and then had it to friends of theirs for, for gifts. Like it's their own wine.

2 (43m 9s):
Yeah. But wine is very different. Their, their tiered system is different. So for instance, wineries can ship to end users. Alcohol business can not

3 (43m 19s):
Regulations. Right? Exactly.

2 (43m 21s):
I could be on a winery in Napa and have a, you know, a club in which I've got thousands and thousands of people that get wine. That's not legal for spirits. Right? And so you have to be able to get on shelf space. And so understanding that we knew we would have to be on shelves and that means a distributor would have to pick us up. And that means that we would have to show a distributor, two things. One, we have enough product to keep it stocked, which means that we were going to have to spend a lot of money on aged whiskey. And the second thing is that we were going to have enough money to put behind the marketing in order to get people, to come into the store to buy it.

2 (44m 1s):
And so in order to source the right kind of, of what we call juice, but really high premium whiskey, it was going to be really difficult. So if you go to Scotland, scotch is so easy because all the distilleries just kind of buy from each other. They blend it. Everybody's sources. It's not a big deal America. We treat it a little differently. And so it was going to be so difficult and so expensive

3 (44m 26s):
Is that because existing distilleries will only work with specific brands

2 (44m 31s):
It's because

3 (44m 32s):
We, up until more recently, because we produce so little extra in Scotland, the distilleries produce enough for themselves, but they also produce enough for a ton of others to be able to purchase from them. It's a part of their overall business model, right? That's not our business model in America. There's basically not enough to build a major brand. And this, this business is so expensive and so difficult that if you can't build a large brand, you're basically just kind of waiting to die. That's, that's the truth of it. And also presumably whiskey in Americas dominated by just a few major multinationals.

2 (45m 14s):
Yes, it is. Yes, it is. There are very, very, very, very few small players

3 (45m 21s):
And are the big brands, Jack Daniel, Jim beam. I mean, is that more or less true?

2 (45m 26s):
Oh yeah. Well, I mean, you have Jack Daniels owned by Brown-Forman beam is owned by Santoria Japanese company. You can kind of go down the list of every major of every major American whiskey brand. And I can tell you who owns them, right? So like LVMH. Absolutely. They, you have essentially five that own everything.

3 (45m 52s):
So it's not like beer where you've got these kind of tiny microbreweries in spirits. There are very few independent brands there.

2 (46m 1s):
Very few independent brands that make it. You have a lot that try.

3 (46m 6s):
So at what point did you, cause it sounds like you had done a lot of research and you concluded that this was not a good business to get into not a good

2 (46m 13s):
Business plan at all,

3 (46m 14s):
But clearly you've made a change of mind. So what was the change of mind if you already determined, this was a bad idea. What gave you the confidence to say, well, maybe I should do this.

2 (46m 24s):
So the way that it came about was one was Sherry Moore, who is our director of whiskey operations, who was previously director of whiskey operations for Jack Daniel, her saying she would come out of retirement. So

3 (46m 37s):
She was the real estate agent who, who had offered to help you make, make the whiskey.

2 (46m 40s):
Exactly. But I even told her I have no interest, but then I, as a part of doing my interviews with nearest family, I interviewed close to a hundred of nearest his descendants and spent time with them. And, and on one particular occasion, I went to interview a whole group of them, a pretty large group of them in Nashville. They got together at their local church and they shared with me what they knew. I shared what I knew. And at the end of it, I asked what was the one thing that they thought should happen to honor their ancestor. And they kind of all looked around. And so I had a really good idea that people had been talking amongst themselves, but no one was saying anything.

2 (47m 24s):
And then one, one person in the room, one of the family members raised his hand and he said, you know, we think nearest deserves to have his own bottle. His name should be on a bottle and you can kind of see just the nodding that there was not just an agreement, but there was conversation that it happened previously. And I left out of that time, Keith was with me, we got into the car is pretty late. And I called Sherry from the car and said, if you will come out of retirement, I will raise the money and we will make this happen.

3 (47m 59s):
All right. So you start to raise the money to create a brand meantime, w w w you know, Brown-Forman, which owns Jack Daniel, they presumably catch wind of your idea. They

2 (48m 15s):
Didn't catch a wind. I invited them and told them. And what

3 (48m 18s):
Did they say? Because it was a risk that they could say, wait a minute, that's our IP. You can't mess with this. This is ours.

2 (48m 24s):
Yeah. But it wasn't their IP. I had already, I already had the trademarks. So by the time I shared with them, what I would be doing, I made sure I had

3 (48m 35s):
The trademark for uncle nearest for that brand. Yeah. You say you were, you were stealth, you were operating quietly, had to, and you came to them and you said, look, I'm going to make a whiskey here. And what was their response?

2 (48m 49s):
The person who I told at the time was the president of Jack Daniels. And I could have pushed him over with a feather. He was just, he was blown away by the fact that we had done all of this, so they

3 (49m 1s):
Could have destroyed the brand before he even debuted. They

2 (49m 4s):
Could have made it very, very difficult and very expensive to say, could

3 (49m 8s):
Have said, Hey, that's our, that's our story. And that's our brand.

2 (49m 11s):
I still would've won that. I'm not concerned about. But the thing is, is that it would have cost me so much time that the question becomes, is it worth it? And do I want to lose all of the investors money in order to fight it?

3 (49m 32s):
When we come back in just a moment, how fun manages to launch uncle nearest whiskey in the backyard of a potential rival, but then faces another hurdle. Being a woman of color in industry dominated by white men, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this Support for how I built. This comes from 3m, helping to protect those on the front lines. Every day, as the father of a healthcare worker, 3m employee, Chris understood how important it was for his daughter and nurses like her to be protected during COVID-19 at the height of the pandemic.

3 (50m 16s):
He worked hard to direct high performing personal protective equipment to hospitals and hotspots. Hear his story at 3m.com/improving lives. 3m applied to life. This message comes from NPR sponsor VRBO. It's time to plan your next family. Get together. And with a VRBO, you can book a place with plenty of space. That's only a drive away. Find a vacation home nearby with the right amenities for your family. So you can have fun and spend time together while making memories that last download the VRBO app. That's V R B O.

3 (51m 2s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2017 and fun Weaver is getting ready to launch a new whiskey brand and the name of uncle nearest green. The man who helped Jack Daniel learned to make whiskey. But Jack Daniels, let us not forget is already an established brand with its own story to protect. So when Fon goes to talk to the head of the company, she knows she has to tread lightly.

2 (51m 32s):
When we began working on this, I knew that they could have one of two reactions. And one of those reactions could be to point every missile that they had in their arsenal at me. And if they did that, I had to make sure that if the way that I would describe it is if, if we're going down, we're going down with a thud so large that everybody will know it happened. Yes.

3 (51m 60s):
But did you get the impression that maybe they might lawyer up?

2 (52m 4s):
I didn't need to get the impression they were very clear. Oh, what

3 (52m 8s):
Did they say?

2 (52m 9s):
It was more of a, they were going to protect their trademarks, not a we're going to prevent you from doing it. I think because the way that they had always seen the story is it was a part of Jack's story. Yeah. And, and so I think it was a little challenging for them to see nearest his story standalone. And so it, the question that they had was how can you even tell the story without, including Jack, which means that I would then be encroaching upon their trademarks. And so I was very clear in, and that I knew exactly how to tell this story without ever touching their trademarks.

2 (52m 49s):
And that's what we did.

3 (52m 50s):
So you actually, I think on your website, the name Jack, Daniel doesn't even exist.

2 (52m 58s):
No, it doesn't. It never has amazing. It never has. If you, if the only time that Jack's name has ever been associated with our brand is if the story is being told historically in the press, or it was told historically in the short film that we did with Jeffrey Wright. And even if you watch that film, take out the credits, the film is, is a little more than 10 minutes. Jack's name isn't mentioned until maybe minute 10, and even then it's in passive.

3 (53m 32s):
But from your perspective, as a brand owner manager creator, it didn't matter because you didn't need the Jack Daniel association. Correct.

2 (53m 43s):
So they understood very use. I understood fair use. And so we stayed fully within fair use. We have never, ever, ever not once crossed the line in terms of a, of trademark. And, and they have, they have done this,

3 (53m 59s):
But at the time in 2017, and did they send a cease and desist letter? Did they? No, no, no, no, no, no.

2 (54m 5s):
We had interesting conversations, but I mean, for me, and I said it to them from day one that my job in C minting nearest his legacy was about building up the legacy of one person. Yeah. Without harming the legacy of another. And so that was a tight rope that only I had to balance on. Yeah. And so I've always been very transparent with them. I've never asked permission because, well, I don't have to, but I've always been very transparent with them because I want for both of our brands and companies to continue to grow at astronomical rates, I want to see Jack's legacy continue to rise.

2 (54m 50s):
Because the only reason we know of nearest is legacy versus all the other African-Americans who did work for so many of the, the bourbon distilleries, whose names, we still don't know. The only reason who that we know the name, uncle nearest, the only reason that nearest green distillery exists is because Jack Daniel's family made sure nearest green would never be forgotten. That's the only reason

3 (55m 14s):
Font you. I mean, you are just a force of nature. You are unstoppable, you are going to do this no matter what, and that's clear, but it doesn't mean it's easy. And it doesn't mean it's going to be smooth sailing. And so 2017, you have this business plan, you know, you're going to put it out into the world, you're going to manufacture, but that means you've, don't have a, a distillery yet. I mean, you had to find, you know, distilleries and bottle manufacturers and people to make the labels and to pack the bottles and to put them in boxes and then to distribute them. And this is an industry that we've already discussed, totally dominated by a few major corporations.

3 (55m 55s):
And there are not a whole lot of women, and they're not a lot of black women in this industry. I mean, I'm a have to imagine, you know, whether it's intentional or not, there's kind of a network of people who know each other and you know, call Jim. And then how did you break into that?

2 (56m 13s):
Yeah, without question, there was a lot of blockage coming into it, but the way that I look at it is, is it, you just keep turning over every stone until you get it done. And so for me, it's not that I didn't have just a ton of hurdles and I am, you know, positive some traps set, but I was absolutely determined. And I truly, truly instill believe that I had both nearest and Jack in my sails. And so I would walk into situations with absolute abandon, believing, without question that nearest and Jack both wanted this story to be told, and they want it near us, his legacy to be cemented.

2 (57m 3s):
And for whatever reason, I have the great honor of being the one who was chosen to do that

3 (57m 9s):
All fun. I mean, th this all had to be challenging, right? I mean, I mean, I wrote a story that certainly in the early days you actually had Keith, your husband pretend like he was the CEO of the company. Is that in order to get, cause you weren't getting call backs. Is that true?

2 (57m 25s):
I, it, wasn't just, I wasn't getting call backs. My entire team, my entire leadership team are women. And we were having a call one day and I realized that every single one of us had the same problem, which is whatever it was we needed. This was before the brand came out. We were trying to get things in place, the distributor, that bottles, corks things that we have to have things that you were talking about earlier, all of these different things that we had to have to put this label out, no one was calling us back bottling partners. No one. And, and so I, I told Kate and Sherry, I said, let me test out a theory here. And then I called Keith and I said, babe, can you call all of these people and tell them that uncle nearest is your company?

2 (58m 10s):
And this is what all these things are, what you are looking for. I want to see because this industry has never really had women own a spirit brand, specifically whiskey that really had not happened before. So is it just the fact that they're not used to this, that they're not taking it seriously. And Keith called every single person on our collective list. And he got through either immediately when calling or they call them back. By the end of the day, he didn't have to wait 24 hours to get in touch with any of those people that we had been trying to reach for three and four weeks

3 (58m 48s):
Font. I'm going to confess that I'm not a whiskey expert in any way. I love wine. And so I know that a bit better, but help me understand what Tennessee whiskey is, what, what makes it special?

2 (59m 2s):
Th the thing I love about the thing I love about Tennessee whiskey is it is the one spirit that we can look at and say it was a process that came in with the enslaved people that made the difference. So Tennessee whiskey is a straight bourbon whiskey. So that's where we should start. A lot of people get confused about this. Tennessee whiskey is a bourbon at its core.

3 (59m 26s):
And that means it's distilled from, from grains, right?

2 (59m 28s):
Yes. It's distilled from grain. It has to be serial grained, and it has to be at least 51% corn really, truly bourbon can be made anywhere in America, it's not like champagne where it has to be made in a region or tequila that has to be made in Hisco. It can be made anywhere in America. Although I think 90 something percent of it comes out of Kentucky, right? However, Tennessee whiskey can only be made in Tennessee. And the only difference other than geography, the only significant difference is the process that came in with the enslaved people. And that is taking a traditional bourbon distillate and filtering it through sugar, maple charcoal, charcoal, it pulls out Connors, it pulls up fusel oils.

2 (1h 0m 12s):
It's basically natural carbon that is in the woods. And so if you, if you use it just to filter, it attaches itself to the generic fusel oils, fuse oils is essentially what gives you. Headaches gives you hangovers and things of that nature.

3 (1h 0m 27s):
That's the thing about like, so when, so is, is Tennessee whiskey smoother like that? Does it not have that like burning sensation that you get with with bourbon?

2 (1h 0m 37s):
Just depends because, because keep in mind, there's so many elements that go into it, how much you char the barrels is going to determine more than that initial filtration, but also how you filter on the other side of it after it's aide is also going to have a lot to do with it. And so you can have two different Tennessee whiskey makers using the exact same mash bill and process before it goes into the barrel and it can taste completely different coming out based on where they, they age it in the warehouse top floor, bottom floor, based on how they plowed, they char, or if they toast the barrel versus charring, the barrel, it's just, it's very different.

2 (1h 1m 21s):
It's a little bit like if you take bread just white bread and you toast it every little bit more that it gets brown, it completely changes its taste. It's the same thing with whiskey. So we have, for us, I can't speak for all of the whiskey companies are ours. We use triple filtration. So we obviously have the process that nearest taught to Jack and to other distillers that, and that process that was passed down to him from other enslaved people, this filtration that happens before it goes into the barrel, but then we do two additional filtrations when it comes out of the barrel, but it's already been filtered once before it goes into the barrel. So it's already starting off ahead. Yeah,

3 (1h 2m 2s):
I wonder, I mean, you're obviously so gifted as a storyteller and you, you had some press attention already around the story behind it, but that doesn't necessarily always translate into, into sales. Right? Look at their Instagram influencers with, with millions of followers who, who create brands that go nowhere or podcasts, you know, how did you take this brand? Okay, you have a bottle now it's 2017 and 2018. You've got this plan, this rollout plan. But you know, really the only, at that time, the only way to sell this stuff was on the shelves of liquor stores. And, you know, maybe some big places like BevMo and Costco or whatever, but how did, how did you even begin to get into the liquor stores?

3 (1h 2m 46s):
What was your cause? It takes a lot of marketing money and, and

2 (1h 2m 49s):
Right. It, it does, it does, it takes a lot of marketing money in the first thing I did was hired

3 (1h 2m 53s):
People, hire who, what kind of people hire salespeople just sale and what was their, what was their charge? What did you say? I need you to do what

2 (1h 3m 1s):
They're charged was to go in and make sure that people knew the significance of this bottle that was coming into the marketplace. And, and the way that I, I would say it is if you walk into any type of liquor store, if you walk into any restaurant, any backbar and you ask them a very simple question, tell me what whiskey or bourbon is on your back bar that represents someone who is not a white male and just wait.

3 (1h 3m 29s):
Wow. And that was the approach that, that their sales reps took.

2 (1h 3m 33s):
Absolutely. Because we had to understand that white males represent 30% of this country at a hundred percent of the whiskeys up until uncle nearest 100%. And so I would ask the question and then I'd go, I'll wait. And it was always amazing to see the enlightened Mitt of those who look at their, and they just, one by one would look at every bottle and go, holy cow, this entire time, a country that was built with blacks and whites, and this is our native spirit.

2 (1h 4m 14s):
And we know without question that African-Americans specifically the enslaved African-Americans were involved in every bit of the process from manufacturing to barrel making and barrel rolling and charring. And, and they would go home to, to whatever home they had covered in smoke and, and just black from top to bottom because of all of the hard work and not one bottle on any shelf represented someone who was not white male.

3 (1h 4m 45s):
And that was enough to convince enough bars and liquor stores to at least carry the brand.

2 (1h 4m 52s):
It convinced him to carry the brand. And then it was our job to make sure that people understood that what they were doing when they bought a glass or a bottle of uncle nearest was not simply to sip on the whiskey. We need them to tell the story we need for the first African-American master distiller, his name to be forever known and honored the same way that Daniel and Johnny Walker and Jim beam have been known and honored for over 150 years. We're just now starting to praise nearest 150, 160 years after those guys.

3 (1h 5m 31s):
What I'm, what I'm trying to understand is once you, I mean, the story is so compelling, right? It's clear that that was going to be enough in, in some cases to get it on the shelves, right. Or to get it on the bar, but it's still not enough to connect it to the consumer, right? Because once your sales reps leave, they've told the story to the liquor store owner or the bartender. I walk into a liquor store and there are, let's say, 40 or 50 different whiskey brands to pick from how did, how do you then create awareness? How did you get people to choose your brand? Because they may not know the story. And maybe all they care about is a great whiskey, which is what you're producing, but how did you go from being on the shelves to people actually buying it?

2 (1h 6m 14s):
Well, there's a couple of things we did very early on. I asked my head of sales to enter our whiskey into every spirit competition around the world. Right. And I knew that if we could begin taking double gold and best in class in every major competition, which by the way, there's been, I think, 16 major competitions this year and we've received 13 best in class. So we have, we have swept all of the major competitions this year with the exception of a few. And even in those, we got gold and double gold. And so I knew that we had to have a product that ran with the big dogs. And one of the places where we were going to be able to achieve earned media is if we kept sweeping all the awards.

2 (1h 7m 0s):
And so that's where we began, but we also utilize scarcity marketing. Last September. We were out of stock in the entire country, meaning we were selling much faster than we could bottle. I spent a million dollars in commercial ads when we were out of stock everywhere in the country. And the reason I did that is because individual consumers within walk into a store and say, do you have uncle nearest? No, we're out of stock. And then the next one and the next one. So then you have these clerks who all day long are selling spirits and not thinking anything of it.

2 (1h 7m 41s):
But if you keep having people come in and you have to keep telling them that there's a particular one that sold out now they're Googling to find out why is this brand sold out? Now, all of a sudden they have the story and they understand the brand you have now created ambassadors all over this country. And so every individual consumer became an ambassador and all of those who at the different stores and restaurants and bars who were out of stock, they became ambassadors because they naturally became curious at why is everyone the walking in and trying to buy a bottle that I'm out of style.

2 (1h 8m 21s):
And that's how we've, we've gotten consumers to know more mental availability. That's how we've done it.

3 (1h 8m 29s):
It seems like, and I don't want to be presumptuous. I don't know if this is the case, but, but it seems like you had a huge boost in sales in 2020. Part of that because alcohol and beverage sales in general had a huge year because the pandemic and in part, because there was a greater awareness around your brand and other black owned brands in the wake of, you know, massive social justice demonstrations around the country. Is that, is that true? Did that happen?

2 (1h 8m 58s):
I don't think so. I actually don't think that either one had to do with the propelling of our company and the reason why I can say that is because we're craft spirits. We're independent, no independence all big years last year, because the big guys, once the pandemic happened, they've got to keep those shares up. Right? And so they took over the shelf space. There was very little shelf space that remained for craft distillers. And I think that we did something very different during the pandemic, which is what propelled us and continue to propel us through the summer, which is we have 13 open sales positions and run.

2 (1h 9m 40s):
Once we got shut down and were quarantined, I told the team, we are not changing our strategy. We are staying pedal to the metal, our 13 positions. We are going to pick up people that have been furloughed and laid off rockstars all over this country. And what I want for all of us to do during this period of time when we are in quarantine and we can't get out in the field as everyone write a marketing plan for your specific market. I told my team do not pay attention to what's going on in the world. We are going to hunker down and be ready for the moment markets begin to open up.

2 (1h 10m 21s):
So one of the ideas for instance, was from my team member in Ohio Ronica. And she had this idea of, to go cocktails now to go, cocktails were not legal anywhere at the time she had the idea and the thought process was well, if Radhika is right and to go, cocktails become a thing and they push it through the legislation. If we're the first company who has branded pouches already made and Brandon Mason jars for these cocktails, and we've created cocktails that allow for them to make maximum margin, because they're in so much trouble, all the restaurants and bars. If we have this plan for all of our markets, that moment, each market gets approval for, to go cocktails.

2 (1h 11m 4s):
Then we're going to be the first ones out. And it was huge. And so there were different ideas like that, that came out of this this time. So our sales, I would like to say that those things that you refer to have something to do with it, but we just celebrated our 11th quarter in a row of triple digit gains. So we've been a hundred percent year over year for 11 quarters. That was only

3 (1h 11m 30s):
Three quarters. You know, I remember view Jim cook of Sam Adams, Boston beer company, a few years going to show. And he said, you know, the big guy spill more beer every year than we make. And people think of Sam Adams is a huge brand, but, but it is tiny compared to the Budweisers, Coors and others. Miller's whiskey is like, I think Diasio and Chivas and, you know, and, and a few other companies, you know, Brown-Forman William Gran Bacardi, Centro. They, they dominate this industry and you are a brand new, independent brand little guy. So presumably you are a teeny tiny fraction of this market, still small.

3 (1h 12m 12s):
Yeah. But have been growing at a rapid pace since, since your founding, do you have, I mean, I have to imagine it's so cash intensive, you know, and this is a business show. So we obviously talk about, you know, the challenges of, of running a, running a business and the cash involved at, I mean, is it, is there a clear horizon when, when, if, if you haven't yet reached profitability, is that, is that, can you see?

2 (1h 12m 41s):
So yes, we're we have achieved profitability, but at the same time, we're building out a $50 million distillery that we've already put more than 20 pounds into. And, and so our distillery, even though it's open to the public and phase one and phase two are open and, and it's sold out every weekend. And, and thank God for all of the people who literally pilgrimage to, to nearest green distillery because they come and they get shirts and hats, and we've got, I hired the former president of Disney store worldwide to merchandise. Wow. And, but no, it's incredibly, incredibly expensive. I've raised over $60 million. That's not enough. I will.

2 (1h 13m 21s):
I mean, I don't plan on doing any more raises that's for sure. But we've, we've had to structure debt in such a way to be able to make sure that we're continuing to, to build out this legacy and that distillery is not cheap. So yes, we are in the black, but at the same time, everything that we earn, all profitability goes into building of, of the distillery.

3 (1h 13m 45s):
I read that in March of 2021, you had sold about a million and a half bottles by now. You know, when this airs, it certainly will be much more than that. And you're growing really, really fast, but still you're still so new that you can't sell like 15, 16 year old aged whiskey, right. That you've distilled yourself. I mean, could you have imagined being where you are now for four or five years ago when you, when you kind of settled on this idea?

2 (1h 14m 18s):
Yeah. Where we are now is where I forecast it. Well, so absolutely. But what we were very clear about doing is that we understood that we were about 160 years behind. And so we, we work at a different urgency. Then I think that others do, when I look at, at Jack Daniels, they were purchased by Brown-Forman in, in 56. If I remember correctly and you have a brand that is so well established that even if foreman sold it off to, you know, for node or car, who's a French company and may not have any idea what to do with an American brand like Jack Daniel, they still can't screw it up because Jack Daniel's brand is too well-known the consumers love it too much.

2 (1h 15m 14s):
That no matter who takes that brand over, they cannot screw it up. And that's the way that I look at my mission here, as it relates to uncle nearest is to build this brand so large and make it, so the name so ubiquitous around the world that no future generation can screw it up. Jack died in 1910. We're still talking about him as if he's still alive. Yeah. That's what I want to see for nearest 150 years from now, as for people to be talking about him in a manner that you forget, he's no longer here, that's the task, that's the goal.

2 (1h 16m 2s):
And that means I cannot grow this company incrementally at, you know, a few thousand cases a year. I'm not going to be alive that long. So I look at it and think I am 45. I have no doubt that everything that has happened in my life, whether success or failure investments that I made that were good investments that I made that were poor. Every single aspect of my development up until uncle nearest, I believe 100% of it was to prepare me for what I'm doing right now. So I look at this and say, can I go pedal to the metal for the next 35 years?

2 (1h 16m 44s):
And if I do, where have I built this brand to, by the time I transitioned to the next life,

3 (1h 16m 51s):
That's fun Weaver, founder and CEO of uncle nearest premium whiskey. By the way, one of uncle nearest reason ads actually features a song by Fonz dad, Frank Wilson, which he wrote and performed in the sixties before he became known as a Motown producer, the is called to, I love you indeed. I do. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not get the subscriber, please do subscribe or follow the podcast. Wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ibt@npr.org.

3 (1h 17m 33s):
If you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or mine is at guy Roz. You can find us on Instagram at how I built this NPR, Oregon mine at guide dot Roz. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with music composed by rep team Arab. Louie was edited by Neeva grant research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, JC Howard, James DeLuise, Rachel Faulkner Julian's Harney, Farrah, safari, Harrison, BJ Choi, and Elaine coats. And Jeff Rogers is our executive producer I'm guy Raz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

3 (1h 18m 15s):
This is NPR.

0 (1h 18m 20s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that's successful. Financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.