Indeed (0s):
What's better than finding quality candidates? Finding them fast. With Indeed. you can attract talent interview candidates, and hire all in one place. As. soon as you sponsor a post on Indeed, you get a short list of quality candidates whose CVS match your job description. Boom. Just. like that. So. start hiring now with a 100 pound sponsored job. credit for your job. Post at Indeed dot com slash how I built Offer good for a limited time claim your 100 pound credit now at Indeed dot com slash how I built Just. go to Indeed dot com slash how I built and support this show by saying you heard about it on this podcast, Indeed dot com slash how IBU terms and conditions apply Need to hire you need indeed

NPR (48s):
Did. you know you are physically adapting to all your swiping, scrolling and tapping. We are changing our bodies and what they're able to do through our NPRs Body Electric, a special interactive series investigating how to fix the relationship between our tech and our health. Listen in the Ted Radio hour feed wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (1m 13s):
Hello and welcome to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. This, of course, is the show where we talk with people working on big world changing innovations. So, every time you flip on the lights or power of the microwave, that energy comes from a power station nearby. Most power in the US is still generated by fossil fuels. They get burnt. That heat creates steam, that steam turns a giant wheel or generator and that produces electricity. But an increasing amount of our power, at least in the US, is coming from renewables like wind and solar. The problem is that you can't easily store that power. If there's wind, for example, a turbine turns and energy is generated, but a lot of that energy goes to waste unless it's used immediately.

0 (2m 0s):
So some people are looking to solve that problem by building massive battery storage facilities. Essentially you charge up lithium batteries and then save that power for when you need it. But those facilities are expensive and lithium requires elements that are scarce. So enter a potentially groundbreaking solution. Salt. You can literally store heat from energy sources in molten salt. And a company called Malta is working on building that system. Right now, Ramya Swaminathan is Malta's, c e o, and previously she led two companies that worked with hydro electricity free flow power and ride development.

0 (2m 40s):
But before Ramya got into renewable energy, she worked at the investment bank u b s during the financial crisis of 2008.

4 (2m 48s):
It really felt like the world was ending. And so a few colleagues and I felt like we needed to, to leave the financial services industry and decided to kind of go all in on a hydro kinetic business. And so when I say hydro kinetics, the idea was to harvest power from free flowing parts of rivers. So, if you think about the lower Mississippi Yep. Down from Missouri on down to the Gulf of Mexico, you know, huge amount of water power, but no dams or impoundments. So it's, you know, lots of small power turbines, harnessing relatively little amounts of power at each one of them, but bundled to make sort of a distributed energy, you know, generation system through hydrokinetic turbines.

4 (3m 34s):
So that was the idea. And this was, you know, an emerging technology in the hydropower space. Hydropower, of course, is the oldest form of electricity generation, you know, well known. Well understood. Yeah. Yeah, exactly.

0 (3m 49s):
I got it. So instead of using dams to generate hydroelectric power, you basically had this opportunity to install a bunch of small like turbines in, in, into the river, like into like the Mississippi or the Ohio River. Yes. And then, and then you and a few colleagues ran with the idea, you launched free flow power to get it going, but it it, it turns out setting up those turbines was a, a a lot more expensive and complicated than you initially thought.

4 (4m 18s):
Yes. You have to put them, you know, under the surface of the water. Yeah. So that they are turning and you've gotta maintain them, you've gotta operate them, you've gotta interconnect them. Yeah. Et cetera. So the economics are challenging and particularly as gas, natural gas prices in the US for the gas revolution

0 (4m 36s):
Plummeting. Yeah. Yeah.

4 (4m 37s):
Drove down electricity prices. That business model became more and more challenging. But what we had really understood through the process of, you know, and advancing this hydro kinetics business plan was that there's 79,000 dams in the United States, and only 3% of them have power. Only

0 (4m 57s):
3% of them are generating power, and the rest of them aren't even being used to generate power at

4 (5m 3s):
All. Correct. They're not being used to generate power at all. They're there for some reason. You know, it could be navigation, it could be irrigation, it could be all, all kind of water, water control, et cetera. But they're not being used to generate power. And you might stipulate for the record that a good number of them actually probably shouldn't be there and should be taken down. You, you know, there's certainly an environmental movement to take down several dams and even accounting for that. There's still an enormous amount of potential in the dams that remain the dams that for one reason or another shouldn't be taken down, can't be taken down. And so the thesis that we morphed into, we pivoted into in this in free flow power, and then its successor company ride development was, as long as you have the dams, you may as well have the power.

4 (5m 50s):
And the opportunity set is really enormous.

0 (5m 54s):
So I guess around 2018, there was another opportunity that kind of drew you in for a couple years. Google their, their lab X had been working on a project trying to figure out, I guess, how to deal with this challenge of storing energy from renewable sources. So, so let's, let's talk about the problem first, right? Yeah. When you've got wind power or, or solar power, even hydroelectric power, it just, you have to use that energy right away. It just, it flows through into a grid and it has to be used or you lose it, essentially.

4 (6m 31s):
That's exactly right. Wind and solar are now the cheapest form of generation. And the problem with that is, of course, what you just said, which is electricity has to be in balance, essentially, supply and demand have to balance each other, and the sun doesn't always shine and the wind doesn't always blow. And the ability to time shift to take power when it's widely available. So in the middle of a day, for example, at the maximum irradiation and move that to a time where it's not available, like in the middle of the night when the sun doesn't shine, is in many ways the linchpin that is needed to unlock the renewables revolution.

4 (7m 12s):
And that's really the idea that Google was working on from 2015 to 2018. They had in-house at x, the moonshot factory, what they called Project Malta, which then ultimately became the company I now lead Malta Inc. And the idea the technology was really designed to provide low cost, long duration, grid scale, electricity storage. Hmm.

0 (7m 39s):
And, and so essentially, and we have this problem today, right? Which is when a grid receives energy from solar or wind, You know, sources it, it, it may not need it at that time. And it exactly. It's just a surplus. So I think there's a significant percentage of renewable energy that just goes to waste. And I, I guess I should add to that, that, you know, coal or natural gas are essentially, they're energy stores, right? We burn them and we need them, but we don't burn them when we don't need them. But essentially coal fired plants are constantly being burned. So it's like, you know, you, you live in a house, there's always energy available, right? And So, you plug in and you, you, you get it.

0 (8m 21s):
And when, when you don't plug in, but it's still being generated by something. And, and the problem with renewables is that right now, even today, so much of it is just kind of gonna waste.

4 (8m 34s):
Absolutely. So there are two things you should know about renewables, right? So one is what you just said, which is they're not always avail. And when they are avail there, it may be too much availability. So the easiest way to exemplify that is in the case of solar. So think about a place that has abundant solar energy. So the Harrogate the South Yeah. That's, that's Sahara Desert, the southwest California. Yeah. California, et cetera. So when you think about this abundant resource that's available, well great, let's build more solar. Sure. But what are you doing? You're really stacking more and more and more power in the same hours of the day because the sun is only available during daylight hours.

4 (9m 15s):
Yeah. Now, however, let's look at the demand side of the equation because in, in most grid environments, peak demand actually doesn't happen in the very middle of the day. There's a peak in the morning when, you know, people wake up and there's a demand. It's steady during the day because people, most people work during the day. And then there's a real peak in the evening hours as people get home and there's a lot of activity going on. And then it's, it settles into a bit of a dip overnight. And so when you look at the solar profile relative to that demand, you'll see that it's a mismatch. Right? And as you stack more and more and more solar during the day, you're actually not addressing the peaks that happen during the morning and the evening.

4 (9m 55s):
And actually in that middle of the day, at 12 noon, you're producing way too much power to serve that maximum demand. So that's the problem that you can see that's very obvious. It's evident. It's that time mismatch. There's another non-obvious problem that Malta is also trying to solve, which is that when you add what's called intermittency to the grid, so intermittency is that power sometimes available, sometimes not available. Hmm. When you add more and more of this onto the grid, and at the same time you retiring the traditional fossil based assets, coal fired plants, gas fired plants that you talked about. Well, it turns out that the original grid environment was really architected for those fossil assets.

4 (10m 40s):
Right? So reliability, the support of frequency, the resiliency of the grid, all of those are really supported by large moving spinning turbines on the grid. Yeah. And we're taking those out because we're retiring coal plants and we're retiring gas plants. And that's all that's great from a decarbonization standpoint, but it leads to a real problem in maintaining grid reliability.

0 (11m 5s):
'cause the grids essentially are used to having that constant stream of electricity flowing in.

4 (11m 11s):
Yes. And the spinning mass provides what's called inertia, which really supports that frequency regulation. It supports the stability of the grid. So Malta helps not only time shift that power, as we were talking about, moving solar that's available during the day to being available at night. But we're also replacing the inertia, which helps maintain the reliability of the grid. Hmm. You know, a good example, a good mental image to think of is, you know, if you have a generator in your home, you're adding appliance after appliance and you can actually sometimes hear the generator stall. If you think about that and zoom out to a grid environment, right? If you add too many appliances or too many loads on the grid, and you don't have that large spinning mass on the grid to support the inertia, you can stall out the whole grid.

4 (11m 59s):
Hmm. And so that's a problem from grid operators. Now it's not visible, it's not obvious, it's not something that you can see, but it is measurable and it is something that grid operators worldwide are really dealing with as they go through this energy transition.

0 (12m 17s):
When we come back in just a moment more from Ramia about how Malta is supporting the transition to renewable energy and how the answer to storing electricity could be as simple salt Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This Lab.

Fundrise (12m 45s):
This is a huge deal. For the first time ever, investors of all sizes can invest in some of the top private pre I P O companies in the world, including those leading the AI revolution. Fundrise already, America's largest direct access alternative asset manager just launched a first of its kind venture capital product that's available for all investors. And the timing couldn't be better. You've seen the headlines from large language models to autonomous vehicles to disease research. AI's impact on the world is moving at light speed. If you're an investor, you should be asking how AI is gonna impact your portfolio. With Fundrise, you can invest in some of the top private pre I P O companies in the world. Before it would've been virtually impossible to invest in these kinds of companies before they went public. Join the more than 2 million people already using Fundrise by visiting Fundrise dot com slash built. That's F U N D R I ss e.com/built. All investments can lead to loss.

Mercury (13m 47s):
Hey, it's Guy Raz here. You're about to hear from Go and Bani entrepreneur and Mercury customer. To learn a little more about why Mercury is the best banking partner for your startup journey. I chose Mercury because I feel like as an entrepreneur, my goal is to try to build a product in a company. And most banks require me to understand a little bit more about how they operate, how they work, and what I need to do to interface with them. Whereas Mercury is the opposite. I don't have to think about anything. I can just log in, send a wire, check my balance, and move on with my life. Join Goggin Bani co-founder and c e O of Maven and more than a hundred thousand entrepreneurs like him who choose Mercury for banking credit cards, and the resources to turn their startups into success stories. Visit Mercury dot com to learn more. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and evolve bank and trust members F D I C.

0 (14m 52s):
One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app. So, you never miss a new episode of the show and it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2018 and Ramathan is working with the Google x spinout company Malta, to address the challenges of renewable energy storage. So, alright, so at Google X they're developing technology to figure out how, how can we store this energy for use. You know, for example, at night or when there isn't wind and, and there are many, many different organizations and, and, and companies working on this mainly with lithium ion battery storage.

0 (15m 40s):
So let's just talk about one example, right? If you, if you drive a a, a Tesla Electric car and you drive up to a Tesla supercharger, I believe that now all of them around the US at least are powered by renewables. So, you go in, you plug your car in and your car has a battery and it stores that energy and then you drive for 200 or 300 miles or however long it goes and then you go back and you fill it up again. So that's one possible solution which is essentially get this wind power and solar power and just charge up a bunch of batteries, which is what a lot of people are working on. This was not the model that the Google team. And when, when you, you essentially were brought on when it became an independent company in 2018, this is not the model you guys are working on.

0 (16m 27s):
You're not focusing on lithium ion batteries and storing 'em in batteries.

4 (16m 31s):
Correct. The technical insight that formed the foundation of what Malta's working on today in terms of our technology was actually the brainchild of a professor at Stanford. He's a Nobel Prize winner, his name is Robert Loughlin. And he had the insight that you could take what's called a heat pump and a heat engine and put thermal energy storage in the middle in the form of molten salt on the hot side in a

0 (16m 55s):
And molten salt is just like what it sounds like really hot

4 (16m 57s):
Salt. Hot salt.

0 (16m 58s):
Okay. Yeah.

4 (16m 59s):
So it turns out that salt is a terrific store of heat and when you heat salt above a certain temperature in the 200 degree C range, it actually becomes a liquid. Yeah. And it holds the heat very well. And because it's a liquid, you can pump it and it's easy to work with. And so

0 (17m 18s):
Not to trivialize this, but, but you can, this is why you can like cook a whole chicken or fish in a salt bake. 'cause it it's a great insulator.

4 (17m 26s):
Exactly. Same properties. Yeah. And, and So, you know, essentially what you're doing is you're taking electricity, Electric energy from any source and you're converting it into thermal energy and then you're moving it out again when it's needed back on the grid or for some purpose you're reconverting that to Electric energy

0 (17m 43s):
Essentially you could generate energy, heat up salt, and the salt would kind of act as like a storehouse.

4 (17m 50s):
Exactly. Okay. And the whole idea was really to use components and subsystems that already exist at scale in power plants all over the world and just haven't been integrated into this exact system. So there's a salt loop and a coolant loop. The salt loop is exactly what it sounds like. It's sort of where the hot salt, you know, circulates. And actually that's the youngest part of the system. And when I say that, what I mean is the salt loop has been in continuous operation for now more than a decade. Whereas the other parts of the system, the coolant loop, the, the general air loop, turbo machinery, heat exchangers, all those parts and pieces have been demonstrated at scale in many cases for decades.

0 (18m 34s):
So, so this system, right, and, and I'm gonna oversimplify this, but but essentially instead of like a, right now, if you had wind power, right, let's say like a lithium ion battery, you'd have wind power and the wind power would just power up those lithium ion batteries. And then when the grid needed the power, it would take it from the lithium ion batteries. The system you're talking about works differently. It essentially is constantly generating, you know, energy or as you know, as often as possible from solar and wind sending it to the grid. If the grid doesn't need it, it can send it back to the system you're talking about. And these sort of salt heat exchangers can store it and then re-release it when it's needed,

4 (19m 15s):
Essentially. Yes. So it, it works very much like a store of excess electricity. Right. Now one of the critical differences between us and lithium ion, in addition to just, well we use different components than they do is what is called the duration of the system. Meaning how long can the system generate for once it's been charged? Yeah. So you, you know, if you think about that in any mobile application, it's sort of, in your case of the Tesla, how long can you drive, how many miles can you drive for, right?

0 (19m 44s):
You can probably drive for a few hours. Your iPhone can last for a couple, you know, hours.

4 (19m 48s):
Yeah, exactly Right. Yeah. That's duration So. if you

0 (19m 50s):
Had a, a plant, if you had a basically a bunch of lithium ion batteries in a desert gen, you know, holding a energy and there was a blackout, maybe it could power us a town for 10 hours.

4 (20m 1s):
10 hours would be long for lithium ion. So lithium ion actually, yeah, lithium ion actually started really in the one hour space. Right. They've extended to now four hours and you do see some six, maybe even eight hour applications in the world today for lithium ion. Beyond that, it's not that lithium ion couldn't do it, it's just that you've

0 (20m 22s):
Gotta add more batteries to, it's the Exactly, exactly. Essentially to have more electrical storage, you just have to have more batteries just stacks and stack. I mean you can imagine like, you know, like a tanker carrying cargo just stacks. Yeah, exactly.

4 (20m 34s):
More

0 (20m 34s):
Containers on of li. Exactly, exactly. And that's, that's the only way you could extend essentially that storage facility

4 (20m 42s):
E Exactly. Whereas in our system, what you can do is just to add more salt and more coolant and you extend duration while keeping the power portion of it. That is the machinery, the turbo machinery, the heat exchangers, you keep those all constant, but let's say you wanted 10 hours or 20 hours or 30 hours, well you just add some more salt and some more coolant and build bigger tanks or add more tanks and you can extend that duration. So from a cost and performance standpoint, you're gonna really look for a technology where you can extend duration very cheaply. And Malta technology fits that bill very well.

0 (21m 18s):
Alright. So just, I mean is totally amazed 'cause I've never heard of this technology before. You're essentially talking about literally about salt.

4 (21m 28s):
I

0 (21m 28s):
Mean the same salt that that is extracted from dry lake beds and, and oceans and I mean that first of all, that's what we're talking about,

4 (21m 36s):
Right? So we're talking about potassium nitrate and sodium nitrate, what is called solar salt, but yeah, it's a commodity.

0 (21m 43s):
Sure. This is the same salt I think used to soften water, for example.

4 (21m 48s):
Fair. Yeah.

0 (21m 48s):
With solar salt,

4 (21m 49s):
Right, right. And so it really is, the whole idea was to build a system with commodity materials that had a very robust supply chain. There's

0 (21m 60s):
A lot of it available, you can

4 (22m 1s):
Get a lot of it available

0 (22m 2s):
And salt. Yeah.

4 (22m 4s):
Yes. And I think after the experience of the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the sense that, you know, energy is not only now an issue of decarbonization, but in Europe for example, is now a core issue of energy security, energy independence. And that a hostile power could hold a country, a set of countries, a continent hostage over supplies of things used to make energy, I think has really brought into focus the importance of robust supply chains and commodity materials. So, you know, no one's gonna hold anyone hostage over salt.

0 (22m 40s):
Yeah. So, so essentially given that there's, you know, plenty of salt and, and, and antifreeze available, right. And it, I would imagine that that long term, this is gonna be much cheaper than lithium ion, for example.

4 (22m 57s):
That's certainly the hope. Yeah, that's certainly the hope. All that being said, I would say that the need for storage, generally electricity storage, generally long duration and short duration is an enormous need if we are going to rise to the challenge of combating climate change. So we do really pay attention to the competitive profile on a cost basis for lithium ion, but fundamentally we're offering a different solution for a different segment of the market.

0 (23m 23s):
Alright, let's talk for a moment about the, just the us our Electric grid system, and I'm not an expert on this, but I'm, I'm pretty sure it's regional, like Texas basically has its own and then the Western US has its own, the upper Midwest, the south, but they're all these sort of semi-autonomous but interconnected systems. And, and so, and we often hear about how our, our grid system in the US is just in in bad shape. It has to be upgraded, et cetera. So right now, you know, you've got, let's say here where I live in the Bay area, there's power generators and you know, the East Bay and other places, and they're generating power through coal or natural gas or whatever it might be. And all that power is sent to the grid that, that I, you know, get my power off in California.

0 (24m 8s):
How does this system you're talking about integrate with existing generators?

4 (24m 16s):
Yeah, that's a great question. And you know, we don't have a single grid, we don't have an electricity system. We have a combination of very many interconnected And in some cases not interconnected. So Texas in particular, ERCOT is not interconnected right. With the rest of the United States problems,

0 (24m 35s):
Unfortunately. Yeah.

4 (24m 36s):
Yes. And so the question for all of us as we kind of navigate this energy transition, because it's a fact that we're adding renewables faster than any other kind of new form of generation. But you and I expect that every single time we turn on, you know, any appliance in our house, the light switches that the power's gonna be on, it's gonna be safe and it's gonna be available as long as you need it. And so we demand that it's a very regulated space, rightly so. And folks in the space don't necessarily want to be the first to try some newfangled technology. That, that's traditionally been the stance of utilities because they wanna provide resilient, reliable, affordable power that is also safe at all times to their customers.

4 (25m 23s):
So the question I think for innovation in general, not just for Malta, but for all emerging technologies, is, you know, what is the balance and what is the pathway forward to enact an energy transition that is quick enough to combat climate change, but also, you know, meets all these requirements of safety, reliability, resiliency, and affordability. Malta Plant integrates really well into the existing legacy grid system because our system is u is comprised of parts and pieces, systems and subsystems that are used in power plants all over the world, including the United States. So for grid operators and utilities we're a one for one, like for like replacement of that gas plant, of that coal plant.

4 (26m 8s):
And then super important in the context of the energy transition is delivering jobs to people who otherwise would be displaced by the transition. Right? So when you shut down a coal plant, you're displacing those workers. And because Malta plant looks, feels, acts, and is operated and maintained, just like a traditional thermal asset, you can actually incorporate all those incumbent workers into the plant.

0 (26m 33s):
When we come back in just a moment, we learn why other companies that tried to use salt to store energy have failed and how that failure might actually mean success for Malta. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raj and you're listening to How I Built This lab.

Wondery (26m 58s):
Deep in the enchanted forest from the whimsical world of Disney, frozen something is wrong, Erindale is in danger once again from dark forces threatening to disrupt the peace and tranquility. And it's up to Anna and Elsa to stop the villains before it's too late. For the last 10 years, frozen has mesmerized millions around the world. Now Wondery presents Disney Frozen Forces of Nature podcast, which extends the storytelling of the beloved animated series as an audio first original story complete with new characters and a standalone adventure set. After the events of Frozen two, reunite with the whole crew, Anna, Elsa, Olaf, and Christophe for an action packed adventure of fun, imagination, and mystery. Follow along as the gang enlist the help of old friends and new as they venture deep into the forest. And discover the mysterious copper machines behind the chaos and count yourself amongst the allies as they investigate the strange happenings in the enchanted forest. The only question is, are Anna and Elsa able to save their peaceful kingdom? Listen early and add free to the entire season of Disney Frozen Forces of Nature Podcast, along with exclusive bonus content on Wondery Plus join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or Wondery plus kits on Apple Podcasts.

0 (28m 28s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So here's more for my conversation with Ramya Swaminathan, C E O of Malta Ramya. There was a company and, and it probably did something somewhat different, but called Crescent Dunes and they try to use molten salt to store energy. They shut down in 2019. What, what mistakes did they make that you're trying to avoid?

4 (28m 50s):
Yeah, so Crescent Dunes, their technology was something called concentrated solar. And concentrated solar essentially is a technology that concentrates the rays of the sun. So when you look at a concentrated solar plant, there's lots of little mirrors and they're kind of over stretched out over huge field and they take the rays of the sun, concentrate them and send them together to a receiver that becomes very, very hot. And then it, it takes molts and salt. It takes salt just like I described, and stores the heat. So it's really concentrated thermal energy. So that's why it's called thermal solar, thermal solar power. Now concentrated solar, the, the most difficult part of the cost profile was kind of everything except the salt loop.

4 (29m 38s):
So the, you know, the land area is, is difficult 'cause you need a lot of land. The mirrors, you've gotta position them just so they've gotta move with the sun. The receiver is extremely complicated technology because it needs to receive a concentrated solar rays from all these mirrors. And then you've got the salt loop that is kind of the passive recipient of all this heat energy. So what we've done is to take the simplest, the cheapest And in many ways, the least complicated part of the system and adapt that to the Malta system.

0 (30m 10s):
And that's basically the salt, which is the cheap, and

4 (30m 12s):
That's the salt loop. That's the cheap, the simple part. Now, you know, I'm also being a little simplistic by saying, oh, well salt is really simple. I mean salt is corrosive, you know, it is definitely a difficult medium to work with, but at this point there are very large concentrated solar plants operating worldwide. And the largest such plant actually is I think still under construction or recently commissioned. It's in Dubai, it's called the Dewa plant. And it's 700 megawatts with 12 hours of storage. So salt storage is known, understood, and used in other parts of the world.

0 (30m 52s):
And, and given how hot the salt storage becomes, mold salt becomes, I mean, are we talking about like volcanic temperatures? Like, I mean are they, are they stored in like similar structures as like a, you know, a nuclear power plant?

4 (31m 6s):
Yeah, that is a great question. And the, the reality is much, much less dramatic. So the highest temperature in our system, it's 565 degrees C. Okay. And so that is hot. I mean, for sure it's hot, the salt is molten, it needs to be stored in steel tanks and you know, certainly there's an art to ensuring that there isn't corrosion or corrosion struck crack. It's like

0 (31m 27s):
A oven, right? Yeah. I mean it's like a thousand, well I guess not really a pizza oven, but it's, it's not crazy hot.

4 (31m 32s):
It's not crazy hot. And actually, do you know, gas plants, like traditional gas plants that we have right now where we combust gas get to be much, much, much hotter than that. Hmm. So for a power plant it's not that hot.

0 (31m 45s):
Hmm. So, alright, let's talk about where you are now. You've got, you know, that like, you know, this technology in, in theory and maybe even in practice works, it's, I mean the cost to, to produce this. I know you guys have raised quite a bit of money to make this, this is a cash intensive proposition certainly at the outset. Tell me about where you are in the, in the process of actually building a facility.

4 (32m 14s):
Yeah, absolutely. So in terms of where Malta is, we have spent the last couple of years developing technical partnerships and validating the system. We are now ready to deploy at commercial scale. So when I say commercial scale, that's quite large scale, that's the a hundred megawatt 10 hour system. We have built a small pilot in Texas at the Southwest Research Institute. We spent quite a while going through, I would say third party independent validations of the system and its configuration, et cetera. And at the moment we are placing our first contracts for a full commercial plant. And so I hope to begin construction on our first plant towards the end of next year.

0 (32m 56s):
And I think one of 'em will be in Florida.

4 (32m 59s):
That's certainly something that's been announced. So we have a collaboration with the Orlando Utilities Commission, And in Florida.

0 (33m 4s):
And do you, and do you have a sense of where the first fully operational facility will be built?

4 (33m 11s):
A really good analogy that one of my colleagues uses all the time when you're developing projects is to think of a horse race. And you never really know which horse is gonna win the race until it actually pulls across the finish line. So we do have a number of projects that are neck and neck for that status of being first across the finish line. And what I can tell you is that there are sort of, in our home markets here in North America, And in Western Europe, we're focused a lot in Iberia in Spain and Portugal. And so it'll be in one of those markets, but we've got a number of irons in the fire that are running pretty much neck and neck in terms of their schedules to get to operational status.

0 (33m 49s):
And what about the cost per kilowatt or however, however you measure it? I mean, you know, initially will it be, will it be higher? I mean you mentioned that the cost of solar of renewables is now, you know, lower or at least equal. Yes,

4 (34m 4s):
Absolutely mu much lower. And actually in, in places like Spain for example, there is so much solar being produced that they are curtailing solar production during the day. So actually it is possible to charge for some hours of the day at zero cost or perhaps in some places even at negative pricing, which means someone's paying you to take the power. So that part, I'm very pleased to say kind of across the board we're seeing that the cost of charge electricity is trending decidedly downwards and that's a major advantage for storage.

0 (34m 37s):
This is, again, a bit of a, a crude sort of comparison, but, but essentially you're talking about salt battery, if you're talking about a lithium iron battery, sort of like a salt battery. Sure.

4 (34m 46s):
Fair, fair, totally fair salt battery. And do,

0 (34m 49s):
Do you think that, I mean now, especially as power outages are becoming more common around the world, certainly in the US even with, with with weather catastrophes, more and more people are putting lithium ion batteries in their homes. They're they're yes. For backup is

4 (35m 5s):
There And diesel generators. And

0 (35m 7s):
Diesel generators, yeah. Is there a world where this technology is, is either safe or even practical for homes or for vehicles or, or probably not.

4 (35m 18s):
No. No, I don't see it ever really at the scale of a single home. But I do see it at the scale of you could, you could have, for example, a a large town or a small city being able to essentially have a micro grid that is dis connectable from the overall electricity grid and supportable internally with the resiliency of a Malta salt battery, as you called it. So I do see it getting lower in scale than where we're starting, but never really at the, at the level of either a house or a mobile application like a car.

0 (35m 52s):
I have to imagine that there are competitors, right? There are people working on similar technology and similar solutions.

4 (35m 58s):
Absolutely. And and that's a great story, which is that it is a really fertile time for emerging technologies and storage. And those technologies are of all kinds, I mean, there are thermal storage, gravity storage, mechanical storage, and I really think that's a terrific fact for the, for the world at large.

0 (36m 16s):
And, and when do you think you'll be able to say, yep, it's up, up and running, it's online?

4 (36m 21s):
Yeah, so I, I hope to start construction on our first plant towards the end of next year with the first fully in service by 2027.

0 (36m 29s):
Wow. Yeah. Cool. Which

4 (36m 30s):
In utility terms, I know that sounds like it's a long way away, but in utility terms at the scale we're talking about, that's tomorrow and the only thing I'll add is it has to be tomorrow for the scale of the problem that we're facing together.

0 (36m 43s):
Ramya, thank you so much.

4 (36m 44s):
You're welcome. It's been a pleasure.

0 (36m 48s):
That's Ramathan, c e o of Malta. Hey, thanks for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app, So you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by J C Howard, with music composed by Tine Arablouei. It was edited by John Isabella with research help from Alex Chung. Our audio engineer was Maggie Luthar, our production team and How I. Built This includes Carla Estevez, Casey Herman, Chris Masini, Elaine Coates, Carrie Thompson, Rael Wood, and Sam Paulson. Neva Grant is our supervising editor. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This Lab.

Amazon Music (37m 40s):
Hey Prime members, you can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music Download, the Amazon Music app today.

wondery Plus (37m 48s):
Or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com.

0 (38m 1s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.