4 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show how I built. This is now a book and it's coming out in a few weeks. It's full of insights advice wisdom and guidance all told through the stories of some of the most amazing entrepreneurs on Earth. And if you pre-order the book right now before September 30th, I will send you a signed book plate to put inside the book for free to order the book and to get your free bookplate visit guy Roz.com just a quick heads up before we start the show. There are couple of swear words in this episode. So you may want to keep that in mind if you're listening with kits. Okay now on to the

2 (41s):
show

4 (46s):
I would go in on my roller blades because I could hit 50 stores in a day on my roller blades. Whereas if I was walking would be a lot less. Yeah, one of the early stores. I went into I found the store manager first. He's laughing at me because I'm on Rollerblades and I'm a sales guy without a polo shirt and a briefcase and he takes a sip and he said this is never gonna work tastes like sock water. From NPR is how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go.

4 (1m 29s):
I'm guy Roz and on the show today how Michael kerbin shipped thousands of cases of coconut water to New York fought off a brand that looked just like his and built by the cocoa the top selling coconut-water in the country. Remember that kid in high school who was weirdly interested in business who had almost no interest in going to college or starting a traditional career but was determined to start something on their own you might have snickered about them or even rolled your eyes, or maybe that kid was you well, that kids was also Michael.

4 (2m 12s):
Kerbin Michael had the benefit of watching his dad pursue a A bunch of different business ideas, including ideas that failed but the Specter of failure never worried him he knew from a very early age that it's part of the game that you got to take big swings, which means you also strike out a lot and the biggest swing Michael would take would be for Vitae cocoa. You've probably seen their familiar Tetra pack boxes of coconut water and pretty much every convenience store in Early 2000s when Michael was trying to launch the brand in New York City. He was pretty confident that coconut water would take off at the time.

4 (2m 56s):
Most people who bought coconut water were immigrants from places like Vietnam India, the Caribbean and Latin America, but Michael had a hunch that coconut water could compete with sports drinks like Gatorade now at the exact same moment. Someone else had these same exact hunch. It would become a product known as zico and so what happened and what you will hear is a story about a war the coconut water wars of the early 2000s a war with sabotage subterfuge dirty tricks and eventually a pretty decent outcome for both parties today by de coco is the biggest brand of coconut water in the u.s.

4 (3m 44s):
It has about 40% market share. But it would take a lot of time and a lot of obstacles to get there Michael grew up in Connecticut and what he was nine his parents split up it was amicable. But while Michael's sister chose to live with their mom Michael decide to stay with their dad my mom got custody. I think my dad gave my mom custody and my dad was actually packing his things and preparing to leave the house and I packed my Snoopy suitcase put it with all my dad's stuff. If and I remember my mom coming home and saying what's this and I said I'm moving in with Dad. She said okay, and that was it.

4 (4m 25s):
Wow, that's amazing. My mom ended up a few hours later ended up moving into New York city. So it's been weekends and City, you know, and I still see her quite a bit but super close with my dad. What did your parents do when you were a kid as a kid? My dad was an entrepreneur. My dad always had businesses before him. My grandfather always had different. This is my great-grandfather. Same thing. So I come from a long line of entrepreneurs. I don't think there's a single male in my family who's graduated from college on both sides and my dad when I was young had a roller skating rink, which was awesome.

4 (5m 5s):
And those were you know, the successful days and then he had other businesses that weren't so successful and we went through periods of doing well and then other periods of not doing so well and and were those are like this with birthday party. I had roller skating. Birthday party in fourth grade. I remember it birthday parties and yeah Church groups and youth group of ass and stuff like that happen there everybody I went to school with as a kid had their birthday party at the roller skating rink. So so it was good. So I got to go to all the parties whether I was invited or not. Yeah, and then as roller skating kind of went out and wasn't cool thing anymore. He turned the place into a rap Concert Hall. So I grew up why not 12 13 years old, you know hanging out with Beastie Boys LL Cool J. You know kid.

4 (5m 46s):
It was really Really cool experience, so he really pivoted because I was thinking that what happened rollerskating it was great. It was like one day was there and then it was gone. Yeah. It was a real fat. I mean it's just, you know, people stop going and he pivoted very quickly and you know that works for a little bit of time and then just didn't work anymore. So in terms of school, how was it for he was it hard. Was it easy? Were you good student not a good student school was really tough. I had several learning disabilities. He's from attention deficit disorder to form of Dyslexia. And as I got into high school, they diagnosed me and by diagnosing me they put me in what we used to refer to as Romper Room, which was half the day in normal classes and half the day in basically with special ed.

4 (6m 34s):
It was a room with me and other kids who many of which had more complicated issues than I had. I knew I was very late in reading and you know math was really For me and I had a clear goal and that goal was to get seas and in order to get as close to passing as possible. And that was always the objective and I always knew that I would be successful in whatever I did but why how did you know that? I don't know. I just felt because even then right even though I was in these classrooms. I was still Successful in things that I wanted to do, you know. I was not the best athlete but I worked hard and you know, I was able to play ball and it wasn't the best.

4 (7m 21s):
You know, I definitely wasn't a good student but I was able to get by and I just you know, I just had this Confidence from an early age. Were you were you did you go to a big high school and I went to actually a really small High School in a small town and actually so my junior year in high school, my dad started spending a lot of time in Florida because I was starting to build a business. They're doing kind of vacation rental property management stuff for tourists coming to Orlando and and then corporate housing and things like that. And I was alone quite a bit my junior year and I would I would have big parties. I would charge admission. I turned it into a business every weekend is making significant money.

4 (8m 1s):
He would have parties at your dad's house. Yeah with his permission. I'm assuming yeah, he knew and you know, super responsible collecting keys and sure nobody. In anywhere if they were drinking nobody was driving, you know, really really responsible, but they were big parties and I was charging admission and it was a nice wow successful Venture at the time. So you were an end and like to remember what you're charging like five bucks or 10 bucks to come in. Yeah. That's right. It's five bucks and ten bucks for freshmen. Nice you and your dad eventually, I guess move to Orlando and then you went to college to the University of Alabama, which I don't be out in Northern kid. The southern School, how like was that?

4 (8m 43s):
Yeah, like, how did you did you enjoy it? I had a good time. I enjoyed it but towards the end of the second semester. I realized I was actually sitting in an economics class and I was listening to a professor and I remember not understanding what he was speaking about and I remember thinking that I'm not learning anything from him. I'm spending money to go here. I could very easily not be here and use that money or make money, right? And so Was this moment? I remember exactly where I was sitting when I said I'm done like schools not my thing and about a week later. I was back in Orlando and that was it and did your dad ever say hey Mike, you know, I think you ought to get a degree a college degree or not at all.

4 (9m 27s):
Never even. Wow. What do you want to do? Do you want to do that? You think you need a college degree? Do you want a college degree? And it was it was more of a question to me. And that was kind of the way I was raised with every yeah, right like even in in high school. Like what do you want to be when you get older? Do you want to be an academic then? If you do you need to start really studying if you don't you need to get through like it was just a special back then it was different. It sounds like your relationship with your dad was almost like like you guys were roommates like friends. Yep to this day and we're business partners to right now. So at for the past 25 years, so yeah. No, it's definitely more of a friendship and a partnership and a yeah, absolutely. So you come back to Florida and Orlando and you've like go back to your dad.

4 (10m 10s):
Dad's house and live within their yep. And what was your plan? I did have one and it was around that time that my grandfather on my mother's side who I was also very close with passed away up in Connecticut. And so I went to Connecticut and spend some time with my grandmother helping my grandmother who had Alzheimer's I was helping with, you know, all sorts of Family Matters and stuff at 19 years old and then I went back and forth to Orlando, which is I was actually in the process of starting a business. Time with my dad and my friend this computer software company that we were developing to help run my dad's business. This is a you're getting a property management business.

4 (10m 51s):
Yes. And and who is your who's your friend? It was a friend of a friend. Actually. I met him in Orlando. He was a computer programmer and brought him in to help write this system for my dad's business. And what was that? What was that? Like, what did it do? So it does everything from marketing of the apartments from booking and scheduling going to housekeeping management moving move out billing. I mean it's so it's pretty large system. It's like Salesforce but specifically for exact copy that and so you started this kind of business with your dad and your friend. Are you really actually formally started a business? Yeah. So originally it was just let's build this for my dad's business and then we started, you know, showing it to some of my dad's friendly competitors and we had our first sale and then we created a business and I was going back.

4 (11m 40s):
Fourth Orlando at the time but there wasn't much of a business. There was mostly development work that was being done and I should mention that the during some of this period of like you weren't even in the u.s. Right like you like you decide to spend some time in Italy. Yeah. It's during that time period that I was in Italy and I can remember back then being on pay phones on the street in Italy having conversations about should we invest in go to this trade show to show the software is it ready? Is it you know, No, and and you know, that's before there were cell phones or anything else. So why so our so you decide that you want to go to Italy for the first of all, why did you want to go to Italy?

4 (12m 21s):
What was it? What was it? Because I didn't know what I wanted to do, right? I didn't even know if one day, you know, if I would come back and go to work doing that business at one point. I almost opened a bagel shop and Florence, you know, I had no real plan whatsoever and just wanted to take some time and experience and You know took courses at the University in European politics, which I just found very interesting. I traveled by myself. I think it was during that time that I really found myself and I know everybody says this but you know, it really was so impactful. It was a very impactful time in my life. So, all right. So you you're in Italy and we do you do some point you decide, you know, I'm going to go back to Orlando and just kind of focus on that business.

4 (13m 8s):
No, I actually went it from Italy to New York moved in with my sister in New York City and then eventually found my own place and I was doing a few things. I was doing some promoting. I actually invested in and helped open an event space in Manhattan. How did you have money by the way? Did you inherit some money from your grandfather when he died? So my grandfather left me like $40,000, right? And that money was what I was to use for college. So that's part of the reason I decided not to go to college anymore because I felt Make this money last me a little longer. So you had that money to kind of keep you going. That's right, but I'm wondering when you got to New York is this is your 21. So this must have been the late 90s.

4 (13m 51s):
I mean, you wouldn't be able to get a job a lot of jobs without a college degree at that point, right? Yeah yet. I never would have liked we look for that right job. I never even thought that I would ever have a job. It just never crossed my mind. You thought I'm going to start something. Yeah, but I was never really overly focused on looking for that thing either, right? Right. I was just kind of doing and the software business was starting to you know, we've got a couple clients. There was no money to be, you know, made yet. Everything was going back into the business and then when the software was a little bit more stable and ready to actually sell that's when I decided that and I remember exactly where I was I had bought an apartment.

4 (14m 32s):
I took the remaining money that I had I had like 20,000 dollars and I used it as a down payment on a one-bedroom apartment in In Greenwich Village, and I remember being in that apartment and talking on the phone with my dad and I having this conversation about you know, let's start seeing if we could sell this thing and that's when I went to work and took a small salary and started we started building that business together. And then there was the break was a trade show. Right right as a trade show that was formed specifically for the corporate Housing Industry, and it was at that trade show where we started getting real leads. So so you're doing that business and And it and did it start to grow pretty quickly.

4 (15m 13s):
It was a slow burn. I mean, we you know, it was it was a grind for many years. It wasn't until 2005 2006 that we had a couple of big breaks. We brought in Marriott at the time as a customer and another large multinational who was in this space and started to actually make money before that. It was really like paycheck to paycheck, you know. Trying to pay the bills type of thing. So, all right. So you are doing that see early 2000s, you're living in New York and you got your lucky button apartment and the 90s and in Greenwich Village because back then you could put $20,000 down and get an apartment today.

4 (15m 54s):
You couldn't get us a parking space for $20,000 not even close. It sounds like you were doing fine. You know you had this this sort of steady income and you were traveling and you were selling this this software and that was it. Yeah, I would say for anybody my age at the time. Time when most of my friends were graduating from college or starting their first year of work. I had a business that was up and running that was you know, it wasn't printing money, but it was successful and I was really balancing work and life which I've always done. I've always taken very seriously. What does that mean? You were doing what so when I wasn't on the road and I wasn't traveling and I wasn't on one specific phone call because I was working from home.

4 (16m 39s):
I was down at the local. Caf? down the street where I used to go every day having a very long lunch and talking all my friends that were also there and then I would probably you know sit in Washington Square if it was nice and sunny and read a book and start talking to people and meeting people and creating friendships and conversations and how would you do that? I'm curious. How would you just you just strike up conversations with people I guess or people would strike up conversations with its New York City and I was always on my roller blades. That was always outside. You know, it's actually funny. I think of myself almost as somewhat shy yeah, my life has been the opposite and I think it's strange.

4 (17m 22s):
So you're so you're living in New York and hang out with friends and I guess ran 2003 you and a friend. Is this Ira her LaRon? Yep, he goes by Era. Okay, Israeli you guys are hanging. He was a friend of yours from high school. So era was from New York are from Israel originally but grew up in New York City and then went to study abroad in Florence and I had just come back from Florence and a bartender who I become friendly with in Florence became friendly with the era and are was going back to New York to visit his family, you know for something and the bartender gave irri coffee wine few other things to bring and said find my friend.

4 (18m 6s):
He's in New York. Bring this to him as a gift. Oh and and Aaron looked me up. I remember exactly where we met up. We met up at that same Cafe that I was talking about is on Thompson Street and Houston we hung out and we just hit it off. We became friends and we hung out all the time. And what did you have in common? I think we're both very similar in that. We're very social. We like to have a good time. We were, you know, very driven in a way and we were always looking for business opportunities, you know, I remember he wanted to Power washing company and I helped him. I bought a power washer and loaned it to him and you know created a little business there.

4 (18m 50s):
I helped him with something else. He was working on and so we were kind of always doing some sort of business in a weird way, even though we didn't have a real formal business at the time. And so we were just we just hung out quite a bit. Alright, so the two the two of you guys are hanging out and this is important because from what I understand this is There's a pretty significant event that happens. You didn't know it at the time. You guys are I guess at a bar and you meet two women from Brazil is what's the story? Yeah, so we're at this party and we were there for a long time. It was like a February or something was cold. It was late at night. And I remember era saw these two girls leaving and convince them to come back into the bar take the coats off and have a drink they were from Brazil and we sat at the bar we chatted and we talked for quite a while.

4 (19m 40s):
Wait, so these these two young women from Brazil are just you know chatting but there's no because we're obviously this is going to eventually lead to coconut water but there's no conversations about coconut water at this point, right? So coconut water actually did come up at the bar in a weird way. We were talking about food. We were talking about some Paulo. We're talking about restaurants and somehow it came up coconut water. I would you Coco. We actually remember we remembered afterward. A conversation about it, but it wasn't like, you know at that moment at the bar, you know anything specific besides one of those things that are great about Brazil. Yeah, like you could go to the beach and you cannot have hollow but in Rio and there'd be people like with coconuts and they crack One open and get some coconut water.

4 (20m 30s):
Yep. And that's some something that they may have mentioned about what they miss about Brazil. Well, it's it is it is a cultural thing in Brazil more than just a beverage. A lot of the tropical world. It's a cultural thing. It's coconut water is has all sorts of Health properties and in every country in the world every tropical country in the world. Your grandmother tells you a different reason why you should be drinking coconut water and it's an incredibly popular beverage that has a cultural connection Beyond just being a juicer beverage. So so what happened after you you met those limit at the bar that night?

4 (21m 10s):
So one of them Yura, he ended up, you know, seeing a couple days later and then we started hanging out together for the next week or two while she was in short period time that she was in in New York. Yeah, and he ended up falling in love with her and when she went back to Brazil shortly thereafter, he went back with her. Wow, and he plans to go to Brazil for what like a long period of time or he doesn't know or just few just goes down and follows her. At the time he wanted to just you know, go down check it out. He wanted to be with her and so he went he found his own place and he didn't really have much going on down there.

4 (21m 51s):
I went down to visit several months later and he's like, I'm gonna stay and when you got there, what did you do? We hung out a couple days in S?o Paulo hung out with her and her friends and her family. But while I was there, I mean, you know, he was talking about staying and he was talking about, you know, different business opportunities. I remember he was looking at leather from the Northeast making women's shoes, which was you know, becoming a business for export Brazil at the time and he was talking about coconut water and Brazil at the time coconut water was I think within you know, maybe a year or so prior to my visit they'd started selling coconut water in a Tetra pack and shelf stable.

4 (22m 32s):
So it was in grocery stores now wasn't only on the beach and it was becoming incredibly popular in people's refrigerators all over the country. Just on the beach in Rio and he showed it to me. He took me to a couple grocery stores we talked about it. He was in the early stages of developing. What was somewhat of a business plan what let me just go back for a sec when you get when you are hanging out with here or there. Does he say to you? Hey, Mike people drink coconut water here. It's on you can get it in grocery stores. Check this out. I think we should think there's an opportunity the u.s. To heat was he already saying that when you got there? Yeah, and it wasn't It's a we think it was him. You know, like all right.

4 (23m 13s):
I'm looking at different opportunities. This is one of them. This is one of them at this is one of them. I was more intrigued by the coconut water thing than any of the others why it sounded much more fun and interesting. I had no interest in being in the shoe export-import business, right? And you know, we started digging a little bit deeper while we were there but then he said he's going to further develop the idea and so on and so forth and then he came back to New York. Short period after with a more developed idea of creating a brand and selling it in the US he didn't have the brand name or any of those things yet. But he was what he was really focused on and I remember we were back in that same bar on Thompson and and Houston and I said, okay, if you do this, I'll do it with you.

4 (24m 2s):
That's the money that's some time and let's do it together and I remember we wrote down what each of our responsibilities we're going to be. He was going to kind of find the supply do all these type of things and I was going to figure out distribution and right find customers to buy it. So he was going to deal with a Brazilian side. You didn't hit you did not have to go like move to Brazil. No. All right, this is 2003 I guess. Yes, and we were off by the way when you try coconut water or you Blown Away by it or you like. Oh my God, this is amazing or did you have to give a less excited react so I had tried it over the years right? I bring to the Tropics of the a it I'd tried coconut water.

4 (24m 46s):
But the first time I tried it in a package without you know my feet in the sand and the whole head. I wasn't, you know, I wasn't blown away. But when I started to see that it was outselling, you know Gatorade and every sport drink in the grocery store in Brazil. I thought maybe there's a business here and again, it wasn't about creating a big business. We never set out to create a big consumer goods business. It was you know, let's see if we can make a little bit of money, you know, never expected it to go further than you know, New York City. All right. So you go back to New York then era comes back and he says hey, I'm serious about this coconut water thing.

4 (25m 28s):
And you say I'm an I want to be involved. How much money did you put into? Remember? I think it was actually I put in I think if I'm not mistaken $75,000 and then later put in I think the initial investment was 75 grand and and by the way, did you guys like formally put down a partnership and set up an LLC and do all that stuff or was it less formal now? So we pretty immediately formed the partnership. We created an LLC put a little bit of money in the bank. I remember what we opened up the bank account. So you were going to stay in New York. He was going to go down to back to Sao Paulo. And and by the way, is he still he's he went to Brazil originally to date this woman that he met in New York where they still together at that time.

4 (26m 13s):
Yes. Yeah. Yeah, they were still together and I think they were engaged at the time. Wow was I was pretty quick. Yeah. He got a gay. So he marries his woman Brazil and he's going to purchase coconut water and send it to you in New York and you're going to figure out how to sell it. But let me try to break this down. First of all, you were going to sell it in the same way. They were selling in Brazil in like a cardboard tetra pak in New York. Yeah, which didn't really exist in any leverage right? Besides milk. They were cans or bottles. Yeah, and yeah for single-serve beverage there was no tetrapack. There was nothing like that ya know so You were going to this so that was the first thing because you were inspired by the Tetra packs.

4 (26m 55s):
The second thing is what was the name? How are you going to add you come up with a name for it? We had all sorts of ideas. I can remember phone calls back and forth and one day I remember I was sitting at my dining room table phone rings. I pick it up. I'm like, what's up? He's like fight a cocoa. I'm like that sounds like a Ricky Martin song and he's like, nope. That's it. And I'm like, you know what it sounds good and that was it. So you're going to call it by the cocoa you were going. Basically imported to the US in the Tetra paks. I'm assuming you would go to one of these companies. It was already making a Brazilian version of it and you just have them kind of white label it they would basically make it for you under your name by the cocoa.

4 (27m 35s):
That's exactly right. How do you do that? How did he find that company willing to do that? So if I recall he originally went through tetrapack, where were they based or we're at the time we're where are they based? So there a Swedish Swedish company, sweetie. Each family they've been packing, you know milk think parmalat things like that right and juices all over the tropical world for a very long time. So he got in touch with the company and said, hey, I'm looking to sell to get coconut water and texture packs to the US who makes it and they recommended a company in Brazil. Yep. They recommended a company who had just was just getting started and that turned out to be a disaster.

4 (28m 19s):
They were getting up and running. Didn't know what they were doing. Coconut waters are very complicated raw material to work with and and they didn't survive as a company and we quickly shifted to the company in Brazil who is making the most common brand in Brazil, but we had started with this other one and the other one was also in Brazil. Yes. When do you remember what your first order was for? Like how much coconut water we going to buy? So I think we had in the bank seventy seventy-five thousand dollars in the bank, right and we spent went pretty much all of it on the first production. So it was two containers of product. If I'm not mistaken shipping containers.

4 (28m 59s):
Yeah shipping container like like the back of a truck like a big rig 18-wheeler. Yeah. It's like this huge metal shipping containers that you'll see in a port two of those were at $75,000 worth of coconut water. It was going to go on a ship in Brazil and go up the Atlantic Ocean to I guess New Jersey and you lip get it there. That's right. That was the plan for you. Was it by any part of you nervous about spending $75,000 on two shipping containers of coconut water. Yeah, but I had already, you know, like started talking to some retailers and people seemed interested. I didn't think too much about it and I met a guy on the street right near my house.

4 (29m 43s):
I was going to get my morning cappuccino. I see this guy pulling Naked juice out of the back of a truck, you know, I know I knew nothing about distribution or how beverages get to stores and I went up to him and I said are you a distributor or do you work for Naked Juice or what's the deal? Yeah, and he's like, you know kid. I don't time. I'm super busy and I said, I'm sorry. I've got this coconut water project. I'm working on and no kid not interested. So I went in the store got my cappuccino got my croissant and the guy Taps me on the shoulder and says sorry if I was a little rude, I like coconuts. Tell me what you doing, huh? I told him he told me he was a distributor for Naked Juice and other orange juice product. Yeah. So he want to learn more about it.

4 (30m 24s):
We met a couple times and then he became my first distributor, but this is even before the coconut water arrived in the US. Yeah, it hadn't arrived. I didn't even have a sample at got him. All right, so you this is now 2004. I believe you've got the name of a business and you've got $75,000 worth of coconut water on its way to New York by the way. What kind of market research did you have? You know that gave you confidence that people. People in the US would want it. I mean coconut water as far as I understand in 2004 was like Koya sold coconut water. You could find it in sort of the ethnic Isles of dip supermarkets, but it was not in convenience stores.

4 (31m 4s):
Mainly. Yeah, and to be honest. I did such little market research. I didn't even know anything about going at the time either. It was just the stuff tastes pretty good. It's really good for you. It's working really well in Brazil, you know, Vitamin Water was taking off at the time there wasn't Else on the shelf that was you know, healthy and functional and clean and better for you and just thought sounds like a good idea and that was really the market research. And did you right off the bat see this as a sports beverage like a competitor to Gatorade or did you just see this as a nice tasting natural beverage now right off the bat? We saw it as a competitor to Gatorade right? Because that's how it was Drank in Brazil and that's how it's drink across the Tropical World likes like a thirst quencher.

4 (31m 49s):
It's a thirst quencher it slow. It with potassium and so it's all about this kind of natural sport drink, right? And by the way, did you I mean New York has such a incredibly diverse population. So there's a huge parts of New York going people from Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic and you know other Caribbean countries knew would coconut water was is not the right. I mean that was the beauty of what we were doing that we didn't really get into this business understanding that but pretty quickly. We realized that we would have a real business where we could Awesome volume without a ton of brand building in marketing right off the bat. Got it. Alright, so era is still in Brazil and he's procuring this coconut water and and it's a white label.

4 (32m 33s):
So now you've got two shipping containers. I don't even know how many Tetra packs that is, like what something like closing in on 20,000 20,000 cases cake doesn't cases. Yeah, and so we were so excited for the product to land and and one day I remember picking up the phone. It was The Brokerage company and the girl the other end. She said I need your registration number. It says very specific type of number for low acid food products, which is what coconut water to tetra pak is and I said, I have no idea what you're talking about. And she said well, then you can't import it and she was in charge of importing it right.

4 (33m 15s):
So I would have expected she would have known what needed to be done. Now. She expected I done my research. Arjun I knew what needed to be done and it didn't happen. And so she basically told me that we can't import the product until we have this number. I said great. Let's get the number. This was like a number like a like what kind of registry from Yale who would what agency dredge gives you that number the FDA? The FDA Oak is a food product. Yeah, so I was okay. Let's get the number. What do we have to do? Sure, and she said great. I need some information on on the facility and so on but It's going to take like three months to get the number like 3 months.

4 (33m 55s):
What the hell am I gonna do for three months wait three months. This is just to get the registration number. So you could then sell the product and you had not know you needed to do this. You just thought you imported and then you sell it. Yeah, it should be that easy, right? Yeah, but it wasn't I said, what do I do? I am the product is going to lose shelf life. I had I don't have the money. I need the money from the sales to you know to pay for things and she said well you Sell it you could either put it in a FDA warehouse and I said, okay, what's that? Cause she said it's probably about thirty thousand dollars a month. I said that's clearly not going to work. Wow, and she said the other options. Are you destroy it or you export it? I said export it. She said, yeah, it just can't come into the country.

4 (34m 38s):
And so I said, okay I'm going to phone I was freaked out. I didn't know what to do. And then I remembered I had been at this trade show in Chicago where era and I went maybe a month or so earlier and made a bunch of people from all over the world and you know people at trade shows that are always interested but you know, there's sometimes not so much follow-up and I grabbed this card of this really nice guy that I met in the Bahamas who owned an alcohol distributor and I called him up and I made a deal. I told him I'd send him the product and he wouldn't have to pay me unless he sold it right because he wasn't just going to buy two containers worth of product on the new brand right? So he said if you want to come down and help me sell it.

4 (35m 18s):
I'll pay you if we sell it and that's exactly What I did, I went down to the Bahamas spent probably 10 days. At least you two weeks went door-to-door with him and his sales guys and we hit bars and restaurants and nightclubs and I was hitting grocery stores and hotels and just selling coconut water in the Bahamas out of a Tetra pack. And that's a lot of coconut water for the Bahamas. I imagine that's got to be you know, what two boxes per person or something. I think a lot of coconut water it's a lot but But luckily there was no education needed right people knew what coconut water was right and people like to drink their gin with coconut water, you know, and now they could do it without cracking open a coconut and and how long does it take you to sell all that?

4 (36m 4s):
I was there I think just short of two weeks but his guys kept on selling it for say another month or two thereafter, and I believe they sold just over half of the product we sent and then together we paid to destroy the rest of it because it was at Point going bad. Yeah, and he paid me for the product that he sold which was enough to cover the majority of our cost of the initial product. And so all right. So that's the first go-round meantime. I'm assuming you've applied for the FDA registration. Yep. Couple months later. We got it. So then now take to try again. Once again the order the same amount of coconut water.

4 (36m 45s):
I think we did a little less the second time, right? Alright, so this is I think around August of for that's right. And I remember the product was arriving like a week later and I went to a GNC store and I was talking with the manager and I showed him what we were doing and he's like that is incredible. It looks amazing, but it's so similar to this guy that was in here yesterday who selling the same thing. It's arriving next week. And I said, what do you mean is it coconut water? He said yeah, it's called zico and he showed it to me. He had a sample there and he's like, this is the it's almost the same thing. Also blue, you know, it's same packaging. Wow, and I remembered my heart sinking.

4 (37m 27s):
Wow being like this is not happening when we come back in just a moment as a competition between Vitae cocoa and Seco got ugly and why Michael started out as the underdog and made that work to his Advantage stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World.

4 (38m 7s):
Learn more at a j WS dot org. Thanks. Also to Squarespace take your great idea and build a website with professionally designed templates visit squarespace.com and use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. Until recently Edmund Hong says he didn't speak out Against Racism because he was scared. Listen now on the code switch podcast from NPR.

4 (38m 50s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2004 and Michael has just launched Vita Coco in New York City only to discover that a very similar brand almost a Dead Ringer called. Zico has launched in the same place at exactly the same time. That was the problem in the early days. We didn't know if there was space for both of us. Right right. And so there were plenty of accounts. They would get first and we couldn't get in and I should mention here your competitor in all this the guy who's running. Zico is this guy named Mark run Pola who Helga Peace Corps guy and tries coconut water and he's inspired to sell it in the US and you never you had no idea that this thing was launching and they probably have no idea.

4 (39m 42s):
You were launching. Yeah because this is like still pre-social media. Yeah. No. Yeah exactly. So we knew nothing about each other. We just, you know started running. Into each other in the street. I remember one of the biggest distributors in New York. I went and pitched him and Mark was in there, you know the same week and he ended up choosing Mark. Wow. I said, but why he said because there's as much more sophisticated looking as I had leaked Blue Bottle. Yes. Yeah and and also for being brought in from Brazil, yep seek, okay. So it was this very similar product and similar price point same same price point. But yeah, I know I mean running To zico everywhere everywhere.

4 (40m 22s):
We would go whether it was a yoga studio or a grocery store. Whatever it was. People are like, oh, I love your product. It tastes great, but I just brought in the other one. Wow, and did you know I like, this is 2004-2005. Did you when you start to find out about zico? Did you find out that they were better capitalized and you they had more money? Yeah. I knew they had a bunch of Partners and they had real capital and they had they just they also I think I found online somehow. Their business plan was published or their Mark initial market research was published and remember thinking holy crap. These guys actually did like market research and they actually had a business plan like they're for real.

4 (41m 3s):
Alright, so they get they get a distribution deal with one of these big distribution companies. And by the way, we should mention this is super important because you just going from Bodega to Bodega, you're not going to be able to scale. You've got a sign with a distributor. It's sort of like it's not really the right. Term here, but it's kind of like a mafia system sort of this isn't the distributor. You got to kind of go to distributed Distributors. They sit they bless if you don't work with them good luck getting shelf space. That's right. Noontime your kind of grinding away trying to get your stuff on shelves when you would go into stores that were not familiar with coconut water and you try to convince them to carry it.

4 (41m 46s):
Was that easy. I mean, did anybody say I don't like the taste of this? This way all the time. I would go in on my roller blades because I could I could hit I don't know 50 stores in a day on my rollerblades. Whereas if I was, you know, walking would be a lot less and I would go in and show it to you know, the store manager whatever it was and half the time I get kicked out. Sometimes they would find it interesting. They would say send me some but find out later they weren't going to actually take it and then other times people were just like no way this is ever going to work. I remember one of the early stores I went into I rollerblade it in there. And found the store manager and first he's laughing at me because I'm on Rollerblades and I'm a sales guy, you know without a polo shirt and a briefcase and he takes a sip and he said this is never going to work tastes like sock water is what he said and and I said, I promise you I said give me a chance.

4 (42m 43s):
I said take two cases put it in the store and if it doesn't work, I'll buy it back from you. And he did and pretty quickly. It started working really well in his store. And he was one of the early real early success stories, but how did people discover it? I mean it was just on the shelves just randomly people saw Vie de Coca Cola. So this looks interesting. I was every single evening. I was in stores handing out samples. Oh, I'm talking about all the health benefits and everything else and getting people to try it. And again remember I had this instant consumer in people from the Caribbean people in Southeast Asia people from Latin America and you know in some cases they would taste it and they would buy a case.

4 (43m 26s):
No, they weren't buying a case of anything else first time. They're trying it in a store. Right? So I had some early success and then after I would do my demoing my sampling, I'd go home and do the bookkeeping and that was kind of what the day look like and meanwhile you and and zico are totally at each other's throats. Like you guys would sabotage each other. It's like uber and Lyft, you know, like there were stories about Vitae Coco guys taking the price tags. Of zico products in stores and Seco calling up stores and saying we'll sell you 50 cases and give you 25 cases for free and they would inundate stores with zico in order to prevent Vitae cocoa from being on the shelves is all that true. That is true and it goes even deeper. Okay Tom what what what else?

4 (44m 8s):
I mean they would they would literally just a piss us off. They would set up their sampling truck outside of our office every other day and Sample people. So everybody around our office would be walking around he go. I mean it just it was a constant battle. And did you were you obsessed with this guy Mark obsessed obsessed and did you ever meet him at this point and you met him we can we came across each other here and there at a trade show. We just lose it like like, you know member and Seinfeld with his visit to be like hello Newman. It was that I was like this exactly that it was like hello Michael. Yep. Hi Mark, and that was it. That's it. We became brutal enemies for years.

4 (44m 49s):
Because he was used Keys kind of crushing you guys. Yeah. Yeah in the early days. Yeah, and was that because he was running a Better Business than you were running because it was the same product. I think getting distribution early was the key difference for the first couple of years. He had a huge leg up. How did you finally land i--'cause I read that in 2006. You actually did land deal with a distributor smaller one. Yeah, and that was kind of a turning point for you. That time because then you started to get there was a distributor who would focus on getting you into more and more stores. The beauty about them is they were a bunch of guys that had left the distributor where zika was sold, right?

4 (45m 33s):
So not only were they a much smaller distributor, but they also had it out for that distributor and for zico so together we had a this was a war I've to win it with our yeah, and and we were not going to lose and what kind of things did you do to Seco a lot of you know, I mean literally like buying their product out of stores putting it in trash cans taking their point of sale material down hiding it in back room. Wow ugly and you know you think about it. I mean, they weren't huge businesses. They had two very passionate Founders was only New York. Mainly it was really a New York and it was we both built these small sales organizations that were also incredibly passionate and treated the brand like it was their own and Any move on it was a personal attack.

4 (46m 23s):
So aside from you handing out free samples at little shops in New York. What other what other marketing were you able to do on the cheap? It was that it was Era came up with this is idea. He saw in Brazil with like this blow-up costume and he had a vital Coco tetrapack Mead and we put Kira's brother in it, and he would go around New York City as a vital Coco tetrapack we We made these bicycles that were amazing where we took these like a normal bicycle and attached a little small trailer behind it. And we would ride around New York City and we had these Billboards on the back of our bikes that said, you know try to cook or drink that'll cook.

4 (47m 6s):
What's great or take a two minute vacation or these different things and that was our advertising. So it was like a moving billboard and I guess a certain point you hired a guy to really kind of aggressively help you. I only know him by the name of Goldie. Who's Goldie. What does he do Goldie is the best Goldie is Michael Goldstein Goldie was at Vitamin Water and then when Vitaminwater sold to Coke, I brought him over and he came over because his wife is Brazilian and he loved coconut water. Well, I thought it was a great idea. I never thought I would be able to recruit somebody from a company like vitamin water and Heat.

4 (47m 49s):
Came over and he is just this incredibly aggressive charismatic competitive incredible guy. That just does not stop and so my competitive drive and wanting to win was accelerated to a whole new level. Okay. Alright. So you say you see your true still trying to compete with zika which is still better funded and I guess in 2007 you take in some outside Capital because at this point up until that point was it just you and me. Who who owned the company for the first three years? Yeah, you would know outside investor. So you you brought into million dollars to an outside investment firm that got what I read 20% of your company.

4 (48m 33s):
So tells me that you really needed the cash to that point like you guys were pretty low on cash. Yeah, it's you know, it's not insignificant but it's not 20% Wow for 2 million. That's a pretty great deal. Well, we were doing less than a million dollars in sales. So we were not a big company. P'nay and so when you think about it, it's actually a decent valuation on the business of that. And what is that two million dollar infusion of capital enable you to do we hired Goldie? Okay, we hired some marketing people. I wasn't doing as much in store sampling anymore. Now, I had other people to do that. Yeah, and those people were you know, our brand Educators we started to invest small amount into marketing like we got a van and put coconuts on top of it and and pain Did Vitae cocoa and we started to you know how to cook a would've an would arrive hydrate everybody and do some hula hooping and all sorts of stuff and then leave and and era was still based in Brazil handling operations there.

4 (49m 34s):
Yep, by the way, how did you guys pay each other when you I mean I'm assuming that you were handling all the finances and the money and the accounting and so would you just send him a check every month or something? Yeah deposit to his bank account. We went on salary not so early. Lee I mean, we had one or two employees before we actually went on salary still at this point Z Co is kind of kicking your butt. I think if you were I think in by 2009 you're selling like 30,000 cases of month in New York and Boston and a little bit in Miami and La. Yeah, it's pretty good. That's two containers. Tuna quarter containers worth of Vitae. Cocoa months. Not bad.

4 (50m 14s):
Yeah, there's actually if I think about it this actually probably say 6,000 cases on a On a container so little bit more than that, but we're not you were not like hugely profitable bear but maybe barely profitable at the time know we were losing we were losing money and then I guess around around the time you can get hammered a bit because I think I was like two thousand nine Coca-Cola announces this huge investment in zico. That's right with with a path to towards acquiring the business which means that all of a sudden they get this huge infusion of cash. I mean, do you remember what you were? What you were thinking when you found out about that, I was thinking shit. This is the end of us.

4 (50m 55s):
Like, how are we going to compete with Coke? You know, there's just no way if Coca-Cola is taking an interest or basically makes an investment and zico they're going to make sure it's a winner and that you're not a winner and I if I was in your position, I would be terrified we were but I also realized that you know Coke is just so large and zico was just so small. All for them at the time that it was going to be, you know, people were telling me they're not going to be successful. You know, you have to remember they bought I think at the time a third of the business with a path to owning the whole thing over three years or something like that. So they didn't own a hundred percent of it.

4 (51m 35s):
It was too small for them to focus on and to put real resources towards and that was you know, an advantage for us. I think Mark the founder of zico and the team they're expected it to be easy 100 there deal with Coke and And it wasn't that easy. But how are you able to differentiate yourself? How are you able to make the case to somebody to buy Vitae Coco over zico if it was more or less the same beverage. So pre Coke it was more or less the same beverage. As soon as Coke invested in that business. They moved to a concentrate model. So they were no longer a hundred percent pure premium coconut water not from concentrate.

4 (52m 15s):
So we quickly changed our packaging and put in huge letters. Us the front never from concentrate and that became our big selling difference. All right in and I guess in January 2010 you raise five million dollars, but from what I understand. This was not intended to be a fundraising round and you got that money from celebrities. So first of all, how did that even begin? What what's the story so around the same time that coke invested in zico of friend of a friend introduced me to Gayo Siri, who is Is Madonna's manager? Today's U2's manager? He's clear connected in Hollywood and I had coffee with guy he want to have coffee with you.

4 (52m 57s):
They just hate Madonna's manager wants have coffee with you. So basically this friend of a friend introduced us because he knew that Madonna was already drinking Vitae. Cocoa. Wow guy was married to a Brazilian. Therefore has coconut water in the house and he saw this as a big category a potentially big category in the future and so he was willing Take a coffee. He wanted to cuddle you. What a neat thinking. This is going to be maybe an endorsement deal with Madonna like that that was kind of the idea. You know, I mean, he said Madonna is drinking it on stage. He's talking about it in interviews as part of her diet. So on and so forth. How can we work together? And my response was I don't have any money to pay her and even if I did I wouldn't therefore have any money to put her on Billboard's or just behind you know, you did not have enough money.

4 (53m 47s):
It's we're not we're not Coke. We're not Pepsi. Not of that scale. Yes, and then almost jokingly. I said, you know, but we are looking to raise some money, you know, if you guys wanted to invest and his ears perked up. He said, you know, not only will Madonna invest but I'll get other people because he manages so many different he manages personally only you to a Madonna but he oversees of management company the man just tons and tons of famous musicians. That's right, and he's just super connected and friends with all these people and he To making some phone calls and you know called to me more and he called Matthew McConaughy called Anthony Kiedis a bunch of people and you know said articulate it.

4 (54m 28s):
Well me and my friends will take the whole round. Wow, Donna took the majority of it and they all put in the rest of the money. They took the round and now we had these people with a much bigger mouthpiece than we could have talking about our brand and that was a game changer. By the way. Are they still investors Madonna Demi Moore? Anthony Kiedis. Are they still are yep, alright. So all of a Sudden, you've got all these big celebrities get the Red Hot Chili Peppers lead singer. You got McDonough and as investors, I guess they were incentivized to talk about your brand because it would also increase our investments. Yeah, which was amazing, right? So now we're not paying somebody to endorse our brand they've in theory paid us, right they've invested right now.

4 (55m 11s):
They have ownership. Yep, and they're now more motivated than if they were getting paid, you know, a couple hundred grand or whatever it is to go do something and talk about it. Super motivated because first of all, they love the product. That's why they invested now they have real skin in the game. Alright, so when they started to talk about it, did you start to see growth as a result of that? Yeah quickly first. We started to see a ton of in coming inbound PR. I would say we got more PR then any brand of any sort our size should have ever gotten so I was this guy selling this little coconut product that people whew, Months earlier. I had never heard of going on news shows and and getting to a point where a year earlier.

4 (55m 55s):
I would go anywhere else in the country and nobody would have ever heard of coconut water. If I de coco and you know, all of a sudden you walk into a store in Minneapolis or you walk into a store in Dallas or wherever and people are like, oh, yeah. Yeah, that's that coconut water thing. I've heard about it. I'm but everybody's drinking it, right? So what does that mean? I mean, does that make it easier for you to get because I think around that time you also To get signed with a new distributor a very significant one which was the Distribution Company that does Dr. Pepper Snapple. Well, I think it was like the third biggest after Coke and Pepsi distant third, but still pretty significant. Yeah. So it was it was huge because now we have a national footprint right now.

4 (56m 37s):
We could go to National retailers whether it be Walmart Kroger Target and sell to them on a national level. Well at the same time we were getting this great expansion of awareness. So it worked out really well. I think a lot of Of brand struggle because they get one or the other way before the other right? So you maybe you start to get awareness, but you just can't build distribution because you don't have the distribution footprint and power to be able to do it or vice versa you build distribution use that a lot and the brand just doesn't pull because nobody knows what it is for us. These things kind of came together at a very interesting time and it really worked. So what I mean, you're still up against a brand that is backed by How are you able to win because I think you did.

4 (57m 23s):
I mean eventually you had you kind of dominated marketshare thinks like 60 percent of market share at one point for Vita Coco. Yep. How did you Pete Seco when they were clearly kicking your butt in the first few years, they relied on coke and so they had some really interesting distribution points that we couldn't get whether it be certain accounts in airports or whatever. It might be food service things that we just couldn't get to with our distribution network, but we had built a team. I was just willing to run through walls and willing to fight to beat Coke, you know, we were the underdog and they should have one. You know, if you remember I said I early on when zika was acquired by Coke. I had several people tell me don't worry the entrepreneurial startup business will win because Coke just won't focus on it and I realized after about a year or two that that was in fact true and it wasn't only in New York.

4 (58m 18s):
It wasn't only in you. In the US by this point we were fighting each other in London. We are fighting each other and soul. We were you know, we were becoming a global brand and they were trying to do the same thing at the same time. All right, so you guys are now really, you know starting to grow and and do you remember what year you be? You actually became profitable. Yeah, it would have been 2011. Okay. So this is I mean, this is amazing because you would see really launched a company 2004. Two but seven years before you turn a profit, which is not unusual at all. But can you explain what it is? That makes it so expensive because it seems like a fairly cost effective business.

4 (59m 1s):
I mean, you don't own the factories. You don't own the coconut plantations, you're basically having a third party white label coconut water for you and sending it on container ships, which are pretty relatively cheap. So why why was it so expensive? Where was your money going? So the biggest expense is obviously cost of goods. So you make the product you ship it across the world ship it, you know to stores whatever it is. Let's say that costs 50 percent of your wholesale call a price. So you're already 50% down then you spend you know, ten twenty percent on marketing and you have a team and you have operating expenses and an office and everything else and unless you have real scale, you know, by the time you're done you're competing for space.

4 (59m 49s):
Against Coke Pepsi character pepper and Nestle and everybody else. You got to fight for that space you need people to that. And is that because I'm thinking coconut water the margins got to be huge, you know, your other expensive. It's coconut water and you can charge three four times the price of the custom-make but is that just not accurate No, I mean you're climbing a tree for every single coconut you get so harvesting coconuts that make sense is more expensive than harvesting. I don't know. Ages, yeah, but don't compare it to orange juice compare it to vitamin water compare it to water which doesn't have any fruit, right? There's nothing it's an ingredient.

4 (1h 0m 31s):
It's an ingredient powder mixed with water in a plastic bottle created down the street in the US. Yeah, and how were you able to because because I mean I'm imagining that because a coconut is an organic product. You can't it's hard to make maintain the consistency like I'm crops are not as sweet some you know, might not produce as much water some may have more salinity or acidity. Like how how do they maintain consistency? Yeah, it's a big that was a big issue for us early on not only in Brazil, but as we started to produce another country's taste was different potassium levels were different sodium levels were different sweetness and sugar levels were different.

4 (1h 1m 17s):
So taste was an issue, but also new Additional panel was an issue. So over the years we created a procurement team a supply chain team that has become the best at blending ages breeds to create a consistent taste across the globe and to make money. You've got to sell a lot of it. That's right. All right. So 2011 you get hit with a class-action lawsuit because basically the claim was that you guys were touting the health benefits and the nutrients and Go and get hit with a class-action lawsuit from people who say well this, you know, there is no evidence and so on so forth.

4 (1h 1m 59s):
Let me ask you about class action lawsuits because on the one hand, I don't want to minimize them their legitimate and most the time people have legitimate reasons to be involved with them. But I think they're also used by corporations to slow down competitors as well. Yep. Is that what happened in this case from your view your point of view? Yeah, I think You know, look at the time I was convinced Seco was involved. I don't know if they were or not at this point. It was like a it was like a influence campaign to slow you down. Yes, and and you have no evidence is Eco wasn't well, you know, I felt and I still feel to this day that either there was a competitor involved or it was just a money grab and typically we've been through several of these we had another big one a couple years ago.

4 (1h 2m 48s):
Typically, these are money. ABS, you know and I guess it the both your class action lawsuits referral based around the same idea that you are misrepresenting the health benefits of coconut water. No, the first one was that the second one was that we had a little tagline on our brand that said born in Brazil. It was on the back of our package and by that point you were not sourcing all your coconuts from Brazil now, so about a third came from Brazil and we talked very openly about all the work we do in the Philippines and Sri Lanka and Indonesia born in Brazil you And was born in Brazil and that was your plan. Yes and people and you got sued from people who said no, you're not born in Brazil. Yep, and we literally spent four million dollars on legal fees to fight it and we won but the first one you did settle I think for yeah for five or six million innocence.

4 (1h 3m 36s):
Did you learn the lesson that you have to be more cautious about how you describe the health benefits of Ida Coco? Yeah. I mean the lawsuit claimed, you know, we were claiming that it was life-enhancing since then. Obviously very careful about all of our packaging and all of our marketing materials goes through, you know, all sorts of legal checks before anything goes into Market because you don't want to make false claims, but it's less about making false claims. It's just about making claims in general that could lead to somebody insinuating that you were trying to deceive which is the last thing we want to do, right? Yeah. All right, so you once that distribution deal happened you were growing really fast and Big and by 2014 you sold a quarter of the company.

4 (1h 4m 25s):
Yeah to a Chinese like Investment Group that invests in foods. And yeah, it's actually Red Bull China. So there the owner of a Red Bull brand in China. So there's a huge Beverage Company in China. They were looking to diversify but 25% of the business and became our distributor in ciao. So not only do they by 25% or business. I think we paid a hundred sixty five million dollars. Word, but they become your distributor in China, which means you are guaranteed more than guaranteed to become a huge hugely profitable because that's a brand-new market for you. Yep, the biggest Market in the world. That's right. So, you know kind of like Madonna and I'm coming in as investors.

4 (1h 5m 6s):
We had somebody coming in and buying part of our steak and at the same time we got major value-add, right? Yeah just worked very well. So you got to keep seven. I mean 25% accompany you and your investors got To keep what you I think you still own today. You have investors on 75% You got a hundred sixty five million dollars for 25% of the company, which I'm sure gave you more than financial stability and security for ever and ever and ever. Why not just sell the whole thing. I mean, why not, you know, so a hundred percent of the company it made selling a hundred percent of the company much less interesting, right? What did by taking money off the table a significant amount of money, right?

4 (1h 5m 48s):
So I've got the Financial Security To not have to worry about anything. So now I could take bigger risks always calculated. But yeah, I could take risk I could go longer and enjoy the people I work with which is basically, you know, my second family. Yeah. I love what I do. I love the creative aspects of it. What else am I going to do? Right so I don't have to sell the business. That's a that's the beauty of the position that Red Bull China kind of put me in so now I'm super focused on you know, what is the business look like five years from now. And kind of thinking about this business as a broader platform of better for you healthier functional beverages as compared to fight a coke with a coconut water business.

4 (1h 6m 30s):
We are the middle of the most trying time for every business in the world. Yep, endless sure Zoom or slack. I have to imagine that my I would think that initially when people are freaking out that there was a spike in sales. We heard this from Cliff bar and other brands Spindrift, but that after a while they slow down because people are not going into Walmart and Target and supermarkets as methodically as they might have been before the pandemic so Is that the case at the sales spiked and now have slowed down again? Yeah, so the first few weeks we saw massive spikes really really significant growth and that was an awkward position to be in the world was falling apart people were losing their jobs in unprecedented numbers and we were seeing these massive what we were calling pandemic prophets.

4 (1h 7m 22s):
So that led us to do some things to give back to our local communities shortly after the spike we saw Club stores continue to do well everything else kind of declined and then after a couple of weeks it started really pick up again and the business now across all grocery all mass and Club stores is growing significantly and I think it's because people are spending more time at home. They're consuming more. We've become somewhat of a household staple people are making their smoothies every morning at home and they're using our product. Have you had to have any a laughs? No, None, we're all working from home.

4 (1h 8m 2s):
We're going to keep the office closed until September and even though some people, you know, everybody's got work to do and some people are working harder than they were in the office others might not be as busy especially during a time when things are closed if we can afford to keep people now is the time to keep people employed as much as possible for sure. What do you think? It takes to be a successful entrepreneur maybe because clearly in your case, it's not Station right sent formal education or post, you know secondary education. There's something else other qualities. What do you think? They are? I think for me I think never having a fear of failing has been very important.

4 (1h 8m 46s):
Right? I've been told since I was young by everybody besides my immediate family, you know specifically as we talked about my dad earlier. I was told quite a bit as a kid that I'm never going to be successful, right? So what's the worst that could do is fail like everybody thought I could or what so I think that kind of Sparks of bit of the risk-taking nature that is needed for an entrepreneur. I also think that an entrepreneur who's going to not only be an idea guy. There's plenty of idea guys that can't really create a great culture and great organizations. So I think it's a combination of the ability to take an idea, but also the ability to execute against the idea and bring All along for the ride and I think that's been one of the things that have as helped us become very successful when you think about you know, what's happened to you and the success of a cocoa and your success your financial success.

4 (1h 9m 44s):
How much do you think that's because you love your work and your work ethic and your scales and how much do you think it has to do is just luck just being lucky being lucky that he met those Brazilian women you my tiara and and you and people catch a break. I mean, how much do you think it's luck and how much how much is just your bra hard work? I think in order to be successful, you need some luck, right? I look at my life. And I look at everything that I've been able to accomplish not only through work but also personally and family and everything else. I've been incredibly fortunate and Incredibly lucky, but I also think that hard work and positivity brings what could be Brings Good Fortune.

4 (1h 10m 32s):
It could also be willing something to happen and that comes with a lot of hard work. That's Michael. Kerbin co-founder of Vie de coco as for his relationship with the founder of zico. By the way, do you do you still hate Mark Grandpa? No, he's amazing. We become friends ever since we invested in a couple businesses together the friends now so the coconut Wars happy ending in the end. Oh, yeah, I think because we won. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts.

4 (1h 11m 12s):
You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed By REM teen Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Canada slim. Darreth Gales Julia Carney the Grant and Jeff Rogers. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR. We're only months away from election day and every week or even every few hours. There's a new twist that could affect who will win the White House to keep up with the latest tune into the NPR politics podcast every day to find out what happened and what it means for the election.