ZEN Insurance (0s):
Running, a new business can be stressful. And. the last thing you need is to worry about unexpected accidents or lawsuits. So. if you are an entrepreneur or startup owner, don't overlook the importance of liability insurance. It's a critical investment in the success and longevity of your business. Protect yourself, your assets and your reputation by securing the liability coverage for your specific needs. With a customized liability insurance policy. you can face challenges with confidence knowing that you have a safety net in place. Take the first step in safeguarding your business today. Go to zen insurance.com/save 35 for a free business insurance. quote, Get the low cost insurance protection you need from Canada s small business insurance experts.

BetMGM (51s):
Get game day ready at BET M G M. An official sports book partner of the National Football League from game-winning drives to unbelievable catches BET M G M gives you the chance to take those highlight re N F L plays to a whole new level bet. M G M has something for every football fan. So you're sure to find a way to get off the bench and into the huddle all season long. Take your shot at Gridiron Greatness this season with BET M G M. Download the app today and find out why BET M G M is not only an official sports book partner of the National Football League in Canada. They're also the king of sports books. BET mgm.com for terms and conditions must be 19 years of age or older. To wager Ontario only. Please play responsibly. If you have any questions or concerns about your gambling or someone close to you, please contact Connex Ontario at 1 8 6 6 5 3 1 2600 to speak to an advisor free of charge. Bem g m operates pursuant to an operating agreement with iGaming Ontario.

NPR (1m 52s):
Black perspectives haven't always been centered in the telling of America's story Now. we are taking center stage introducing NPRs Black Stories Black Truths A collection of black LED stories from NPRs podcasts, search NPR r Black Stories Black Truths, wherever you get your podcasts.

The Great Creators with Guy Raz (2m 14s):
Hey You know we hear a lot of stories on How I Built This about overcoming self-doubt. I recently talked with Sigourney Weaver about this exact thing and why she was reluctant to pursue acting for so many years. I know it's hard to believe that one of the most acclaimed actors of her generation almost didn't act. You should definitely check out my interview with Sigourney Weaver on my other podcast. It's called The Great Creators. just search for the great creators with Guy Raz wherever you listen to podcasts.

0 (2m 41s):
And now onto today's show.

5 (2m 56s):
You know, I think some people saw the opportunity but maybe questioned whether I was really gonna be the guy there wasn able to go and do this and disrupt this space. You know a lot of meetings were short and there was a lot of passes. Yeah, I developed a really unique relationship with rejection and so there wasn all building my backbone up for trying to raise capital for an apparel brand. 'cause it was kind of like starting a band and telling your friends, you're gonna be the next Rolling Stones. People are like, yeah, good luck.

0 (3m 30s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Joe Kudla made a risky bet that men would buy yoga clothes, rewrote a bad business model in real time, and built his venture into the powerhouse activewear brand. Vuori If. you heard my interview with Chip Wilson on this show back in 2018. You may remember the story of how he started Lululemon. It was 1997 and he went to his first yoga class at a gym in Vancouver.

0 (4m 14s):
And as he tells it, he was the only guy in the room. But in that class he saw that yoga was starting to explode, especially for a certain type of young professional health conscious woman. But most of these women, they were wearing sweatpants and t-shirts. So Chip decided to make clothing specifically for yoga. He found performance fabrics and tested them out, but only on women because at that time yoga was dominated by women. And Lululemon took off the brand basically pioneered the concept of athleisure. And it wasn't until 2014 that chip expanded to clothing for men.

0 (4m 58s):
And the reason it took so long is because people thought men really didn't care about what kind of clothes they wore when they worked out. But at around the same time that Lululemon branched out into men's clothing, Joe Kudla launched Vuori, a yoga and activewear brand designed at least initially just for men. As Joe soon figured out what men seemed to want most was athletic gear that performed well and was versatile. The same pair of shorts that might work for a yoga class. Men also wanted to use those shorts for running, hiking, surfing, or just hanging out. And once Joe had that insight, Vuori began to hit its stride.

0 (5m 41s):
Today the brand is a huge business with 1500 employees and revenue in the hundreds of millions a year. But before starting Vuori, Joe struck out with two previous fashion ventures, but he learned a lot about what didn't work with those other attempts, and it helped him figure out how to get Vuori right. Joe grew up in the eighties and nineties in Washington state. His dad practiced natural medicine and acupuncture, and his mom was a psychologist who led guided meditation retreats. And as a kid, Joe knew that his life was very different than a lot of the other kids he knew.

5 (6m 19s):
I grew up on this little island called Von, which was just off the coast of West Seattle. It was a very alternative community. And when we were in middle school, we moved to Bellevue and You know Bellevue was really known for Microsoft was really becoming a popular thing. And so Bellevue became a, a fairly affluent town and we, we were kind of like the hillbillies that moved to the city and my parents just having these very kind of alternative lifestyles and professions and interests. You know my house was always the house I was always a little You know, shy to bring people there and look in the fridge. It was all these like healthy natural organic foods. And, but it, but it was a beautiful upbringing, very rich in love, not necessarily rich in material possessions.

5 (7m 5s):
So naturally I was hanging out with a lot of other kids who I just looked at their families and it was a little envious, You know, just there was Coca-Cola in the fridge and they took their annual trips to Hawaii and that seemed like a very appealing lifestyle at the time. And so I was a little bit, yeah, I I i I was just a little bit envious of people that grew up in a more traditional way.

0 (7m 32s):
You, you ended up going to college in California. You went to the University of San Diego, which is, I believe it's a, a Catholic liberal arts college. A small liberal arts college.

5 (7m 41s):
Yeah. You know, growing up in, in Washington, I was wake boarding a lot in the summer. I was skiing in the winter. I, I was fascinated by these kind of alternative sports and really fascinated by Southern California beach culture. And I remember I called the admissions office. I think the first contact I ever had with the school was to ask them how many miles away they were from the beach. And I remember the answer was seven. They were seven miles away from the beach. And there wasn good enough for me and You know I had to work my way through school. My parents literally sent me there with virtually no money. And, and it was up to me to get through. I had scholarship and financial aid, but, but my friends again, were always You know. It never stopped me from being a part of that social scene.

5 (8m 24s):
Hmm.

0 (8m 25s):
I I guess you majored in, in accounting in college and, and when you graduated you were, I guess the plan was you're gonna work at Ernst and Young in, in San Diego, like as a, as a trainee. Yeah. But that didn't, didn't happen at least initially. So, so what happened instead? What, what happened that summer?

5 (8m 43s):
Yeah, so I was surfing in La Jolla one day and I came outta the water and was going back to my car. And a, a woman stopped me on the beach and asked me if I had ever considered modeling before. And it was something I kind of chuckled at at the time. But she explained to me that her son had been living in Europe and had been traveling and having this incredible life experience. And if I'd be open to exploring it, she would introduce me to this guy. So I said, okay, well I'll take a meeting. So I met this gentleman, he was a manager and he was having a casting in San Diego with a, an agency from Milan in Italy. And so he encouraged me to come to this casting and he told me that if I happened to get picked, he would represent me.

5 (9m 28s):
And so I remember I showed up, there was a line wrapped around the, the block and I waited in line and I met with this group and You know, they ended up choosing me to go and You know, I think I was like one of, there was three guys that were selected. And so wow. I flew straight to Milan with a suitcase of the wrong type of clothing. And I ended up spending the summer working in the, in the fashion industry as a model and fell in love with it and was like, why would I go home? I'm traveling the world. I have an opportunity to continue doing this. And, and so that's what I did for a couple years.

0 (10m 2s):
I hesitate to ask you this, 'cause I know you've been asked this a thousand times by your friends and people who might've given you a bit of a ribbing, but was it anything like Zoolander?

5 (10m 12s):
I did love that movie 'cause They, weren, They weren, some, some things that maybe were just a little bit too close to home, but I actually didn't really ever like being in front of the camera or on the runway. Those things didn't necessarily light me up, but I learned so much and it was like my little peek behind the curtain at the fashion industry to understand how things work a little bit. And ultimately I loved watching designers build collections and how they worked with fabrics and You know, just being around the creativity was very inspiring.

0 (10m 47s):
Did you make decent money? I mean, at at that level of modeling, especially as a man, can you, can you actually make good money?

5 (10m 55s):
You know, I was never, I was never a superstar model. I made enough to travel and come home with enough money to buy a car and, and kind of settle in and, and get my roots back in San Diego, but Right. But it wasn't, it was never gonna be a huge career for me.

0 (11m 12s):
So you always knew you were gonna come back to pursue being a A C P A, but to come back as an auditor, and I guess that's what happened. You came after two years, you got, I guess Ernst and Young in San Diego agreed to hold your job for you and and you went to start your work there.

5 (11m 28s):
Yes, exactly.

0 (11m 29s):
In meantime, I guess you started a little side hustle with, with your girlfriend at the time. Yeah. Tell me about who, who she was, what this side hustle was that you started.

5 (11m 41s):
Yeah, I went up to Washington in the summer before I started my job at Ernst and Young and, and was studying for the C p A exam and she was about to get ready to go off and, and start at Fit M and study fashion. And so, so we dated for a while and when she graduated from fit, I encouraged her that You know we should just start our own brand and she could design the clothes. I would help her in every way possible. I would do all the books. I would help use my salary from RC and young to fund the business. And so there wasn there wasn the path. We, we decided to launch a women's contemporary brand. We called it Sammy Joe, which was her middle name and my first name.

5 (12m 25s):
And we jumped in not knowing anything about what we were doing.

0 (12m 30s):
And I guess presumably the idea of of launching a, a women's fashion brand, you were inspired by your time in Europe. You were like, this is You know. I've been watching these You know these brands. I've been watching You know how they take textiles and turn 'em into clothing. I've been You know, I've visited manufacturing facilities, like I think maybe I can do this.

5 (12m 51s):
Yeah. I was very naive, but I had never taken an art class. I'd never nurtured a creative bone in my body. I had just always You know, ran into things for sport You know I was a football player and a lacrosse player. So I I I didn't have a lot of confidence in my own creative sensibilities, but I loved supporting others that did. And, and so we decided to start Sammy Joe. It was a women's contemporary line. We would drive up to Los Angeles on the weekends and shop for fabrics and we'd literally drive away with bolts of fabrics that we would buy on the open market. And then we would work in San Diego with local pattern makers. You know Abby would do design work and we would visit little specialty boutiques and we would sell them our clothes.

5 (13m 36s):
And You know we got into a bunch of great boutiques up and down the California coast. It was a really awesome experience.

0 (13m 42s):
How did you, I mean, so Abby is, was your partner She was designing the clothing? Yeah. Was it blouses, trousers? Like what types of clothing was were you making?

5 (13m 53s):
Yeah, it was wom, it was women's contemporary clothing. So we worked with a lot of You know silks and we would do skirts and little You know blouses and dresses, things of that nature.

0 (14m 6s):
And in meantime, you were doing at least 40 hours a week at Ernst and Young,

5 (14m 10s):
40 hours on a light week. It was a very busy time in my life. And You know we were young and we had a lot of, a lot of energy, so we were able to, to do it. But the fact that the materials we were using weren't repeatable 'cause we were just buying 'em off jobbers. They were like leftover scraps. And so we couldn't really create a repeatable model for making the clothes we were making and we didn't know enough. And so ultimately at that time we were faced with that decision. We chose to close the business. So it was a, it was a great learning experience. I learned how clothing is made and so for that I'm forever grateful.

0 (14m 47s):
So You, alright. Alright. So you closed that business, but, but almost immediately, while I think you were still at Ernst and Young, you, you started another one. What, what was that? What, what was that business?

5 (14m 60s):
Yeah, so when I closed Sammy Joe, I very quickly thereafter started a, a graphic t-shirt company with a partner.

0 (15m 10s):
And, and this partner was, what was his, her name,

5 (15m 14s):
His name was Chad. Chad was a really talented graphic designer. And so we decided to start making t-shirts working with different humanitarians and environmentalists to tell their story on the inside of these garments. And then, Hmm. But really the business model was just to sell them to boutiques. 'cause they were really cool. The art was very contemporary, it was very fashionable. And You know, this is at the time when like Ed Hardy and these brands with like big graphics all down the front of the shirt was really popular back in the early two thousands. Hmm. And so there wasn the, there wasn what we were creating with Vuori.

0 (15m 51s):
You called it V you called it Vuori?

5 (15m 53s):
Yeah. Yeah. It was a, it was a different business but it was called Vuori. and that, that's ultimately where I got the name to start. The Vuori that You know today.

0 (16m 2s):
And, and that name means mountain in Finnish.

5 (16m 6s):
Well, You know, it's interesting 'cause Vuori 1.0 it was all about honoring these humanitarians envir environmentalists. They were our heroes. We kind of told the story of how they almost climbed these mountains with, with what they were choosing to pursue and what they were taking on.

0 (16m 23s):
And so I'm still trying to figure out how, how there wasn gonna make money. You would, you would sell the t-shirts into boutiques and I understand the humanitarian side of it, but like you still have to make a sustainable business right. To finance your business. So how was like, just help me understand how this was going to be a viable business.

5 (16m 44s):
Yeah, I mean, no different than like a Tom's shoes or any brand that has a give back component to their brand. Okay. There was a great margin business in apparel and there was enough leftover for, for us to donate a percentage proceeds back to these organizations. So

0 (16m 58s):
There wasn the model. It was like, you buy this shirt, we're gonna give some of the proceeds to this group. That and, and, and how did you get into, did you get into like how many stores did you get into?

5 (17m 10s):
We were probably selling to 25 to 30 stores when we decided that we needed to close the business. And, and a couple of things happened kind of concurrently, but the great financial crisis of like 2007, 2008 hit right after we started the business. And all of a sudden Walmart started selling organic cotton graphic t-shirts for $25. And we just kind of, we just could not compete. And the, the plan that we had wasn't, we weren't getting the type of traction that we needed to see in order to continue on. And Chad wanted to go and travel and, and came to me one day and said, Hey, I, I'm gonna go travel around the, the US in an RV and, and I'm, I'm out.

0 (17m 56s):
So when Chad, when you guys decided to kind of shut down this business, what do you remember thinking, this is around 2007, eight, I guess, did you think, well there's still something else in me or did you think, okay, maybe I'm not cut out for this 'cause that's You know the second business I've shut down and, and I wouldn't say other of them were failures, you just, they didn't quite reach velocity like you'd wanted them to.

5 (18m 21s):
Yeah, You know it. I was heartbroken and I always saw something big for that business and I always thought it could really materialize into something. It probably wasn't gonna end up going anywhere. And so I think ultimately closing that business was really the wisest decision, even though at the time it felt like a, a death in my family. You know. It was something that I'd put a lot of energy and invested You know my, my, all of my savings into.

0 (18m 50s):
Alright. Alright. So you closed down the second apparel business and I guess you also, around this time you also decide to leave Ernst and Young and, and then, and then I guess, and then you help launch yet another business, which is not, this one was not in fashion, but I guess this was a like a recruiting and a, and a consulting firm called, called Vaco. Yeah. Which I, I guess you did with a, a couple of other people and and you did this for quite some time, like eight eight or so years. But during that period where you also thinking about You know, like maybe one day getting back into fashion.

5 (19m 27s):
Yeah. You know at this point I wasn't, wasn't eager to start another apparel brand. You know Chad and I parted ways and I bought the trademark off of him. So I had that sitting there just knowing that I loved the name in the brand. So in the event I ever did want to do something in the future, it could be there as an option. But, but no, I just immersed myself into Vaco and we ended up building a really great company. We had a couple hundred consultants working for us across San Diego. We had multiple lines of business, but I'm kind of starting to feel like maybe material wealth alone isn't ultimately what's gonna inspire me.

5 (20m 8s):
I was going through a tough time in my life. I just have a, a had a business partner that You know had kind left and, but my first marriage didn't work out. I got divorced and I was in a relationship there wasn, You know, kind of toxic and probably not good for me. And, and I was partying probably more than I should have.

0 (20m 30s):
So there's a story I've read and I, and I'd love to to sort of tease this out a little bit because I guess there was a, a you, you met somebody at a party. I've seen this described as a psychic. Tell me about this story because I don't know whether this is apocryphal real or if it's even that significant in your life. Yeah, but I, I read about it, so I'm curious to hear your take. Yeah,

5 (20m 54s):
It's very much a part of my story and so happy to share. I I'm at a party and this woman who was a life coach, she worked with a lot of executives, but she's also an intuitive, came up to me and she started telling me all these really crazy things about my life, about how I was raised, how like my mom was my dad. She told me that I had had worked on a business there wasn my passion that I wanted to be successful so desperately. And she said, this business that you're working on this, this idea is gonna be wildly successful. She's like, it's gonna be bigger than you could ever imagine, but it's not gonna be in its current form and it's not gonna be with your current business partner.

5 (21m 41s):
And I just literally started crying and ultimately she encouraged me, You know to step into some of those things that I was feeling. And so the next day I woke up, I broke up with my girlfriend and I went to a yoga class, a friend that had been suggesting that I try yoga to heal my back for a long time. But I knew that yoga had a lot more benefits than just physical.

0 (22m 9s):
So you start to get into yoga, right? I mean, did you connect to it right away? Was it, did it feel cathartic like almost immediately?

5 (22m 16s):
Well, at first it felt really hard. You know and You know being somebody that's worked out and been into exercise and played a lot of sports. You know I wasn't scared of a hard workout, but, but yoga was just different. And I was taking these, they were non-heated classes, but I was sweating so much and it was like very intense. And then the feeling you would get after class was just like a complete release, like complete relaxation and, and I became really addicted. It was like a very healing experience, not only for the physical benefits and getting a lot of relief in my back, but also just feeling light. So

0 (22m 54s):
Joe, while you're, I mean obviously you had two small apparel brands that you'd started in the past, neither of which kind of panned out. You had experience as a model, as a younger man, clearly at some point you started to think about what you were doing and apparel and particularly apparel for people like you, for guys. Tell me how those ideas started to percolate in your mind. When do you remember starting to think You know there's there's something missing here.

5 (23m 25s):
Yeah, well You know, it was really a, a good friend of mine, a guy named Chris Miller who's a hall of fame skateboarder. And Chris had started some action sports brands. His first company was a company called Planet Earth, which was one of the first sustainable action sports brands. They did a lot of cool outerwear for snowboarding. And, and then he sold that business to K two sports and then became the president of their action sports division. And they launched a, a skate shoe company called Audio Footwear. And so Chris also was very into yoga. We'd go to the same classes together and You know I was starting to think about apparel and getting another brand going.

5 (24m 5s):
And Chris was actually having a lot of the same kind of thoughts. And, and so he and I would go surf together and it was just a very inspiring time. And we live in this incredible community in, in Encinitas, in, in coastal North county San Diego. And it's, it's a, this stretch of coast right along the Pacific Ocean, there's yoga studios on every block. And Chris and I always felt like Encinitas is the perfect source of inspiration for a brand.

0 (24m 32s):
I mean, meantime, They weren brands out there, right? I mean there was Patagonia for example. Just the first thing that comes to the top of my head, maybe that's more sort of mountaineering and hiking, but, and They weren surf brands, surf brands have been around for a long time. But what, what was it, what was missing?

5 (24m 51s):
What what our observation was that the big brands that we grew up with as kids competing in sports You know you think of the Nikes and the Adidases of the world. Like they designed clothing that really identified you as somebody there wasn going to the gym or going to compete in a sport. It had a very competitive spirit about it. It was very urban, kind of street inspired, a lot of big logos, shiny reflective details, kind of loose baggier fits. But as I've gotten older and now I'm in my thirties, I'm going to Yoga You know the lifestyle was just very different. Like studio fitness was booming and it became all about community.

5 (25m 36s):
Yeah. People weren't looking for product that you just wanted to rush and change out of right. When class was over. 'cause you would stick around, you'd mix and mingle, you'd go do something with friends. And so we needed clothing that would keep up with us. And so what was really interesting is in Southern California, our observation was that people were wearing board shorts that were designed for surfing

0 (25m 55s):
Like long, longer shorts. Right. That went almost went down to your knees.

5 (25m 59s):
Yeah, exactly. And they had fixed waistbands. And so when they would you get sweaty, they would kind of fall down off your hips and great for surfing, but not necessarily designed for sweat and movement in the way that you'd move in a yoga studio. And so our feeling was like, why is it that people in Southern California that maybe grew up in these subcultures of surf and skate didn't identify with the big mainstream activewear brands?

0 (26m 26s):
And so you, so you thought, all right, I'm gonna, I'm gonna go for this. And was Chris also ready to do it at that point? Or, or not quite yet. Was he still 'cause he, he was running a, a business.

5 (26m 41s):
Yeah, You know. Ultimately we decided that we were gonna, that I would be the first one to leave. I would quit my day job. And the plan originally was that Chris would eventually kind of follow suit and, and join me on the journey. And I understood that if we were gonna have a chance at at doing it, I was gonna have to jump in with two feet. Because there's just too many opportunities where things get tough and you wanna retreat back to what's comfortable and If, you have a day job, you have a salary paying the bills, it's too easy to return to that safe space. People thought I was crazy at that time, especially my parents who were like, wait a minute, you've just invested eight years of your life building this great company of great flexibility.

5 (27m 22s):
Like why would you leave to start your third apparel company? Two of which have already failed. And I had this acute awareness of what it would be like to be on my deathbed looking back and saying, gosh, I saw that opportunity so clearly and Didn didn't pursue it and I just wasn't willing to live with that. I couldn't live with that.

0 (27m 42s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Joe sets out to design activewear that does not scream activewear. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This

Lands End (28m 2s):
Uniforms are an important part of making your brand recognizable and memorable. Like whenever I see a Royal Blue polo, I think Best Buy, anyone can slap a logo on a boring generic shirt. But with LANs end business, you can get made to order uniforms that become part of your brand. Whether you're a carpet cleaner, mechanic moving company, or Corner Pizza Shop, LAN's end has your uniform needs covered. Get customized uniforms that fit the way you work and keep your employees cool, dry and comfortable. Landsend premium fabric and fit offer all day comfort that keeps employees happy and confident. See why thousands of companies count on Landsend business. Go to business.landsend.com/built and use promo code built for 20% off your order. That's business.landsend.com/built promo code built for 20% off your order.

Squarespace (29m 5s):
Squarespace is the all-in-one platform for building your brand and growing your business online. Stand out with a beautiful website, engage with your customers and sell anything your products, content you create and even your time. Squarespace also makes booking and scheduling super easy. Clients can easily see your availability, taking the hassle out of coordinating calendars. You can also create professional quality videos effortlessly using the Squarespace video studio app. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your email's impact. So if you're looking for a way to level up your business, check out squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

0 (30m 8s):
One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show and it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2013. Joe leaves his consulting firm Vaco and starts working with a new partner, Chris, to start an activewear brand for men.

5 (30m 37s):
We needed to raise money and we would have calls with private individuals, sometimes financial institutions, really anybody there wasn willing to talk to us. We put together a brand deck and a business plan. We took a lot of investor calls and sadly got a lot of rejection in those early days.

0 (30m 57s):
What was the, what was your, what was your pitch? Tell me how you would pitch me. I mean, as you'd come in, you'd say, we're gonna start a men's lifestyle brand. And I'm, and I'm like, well what does that mean? Tell me what you would say.

5 (31m 6s):
Well it was very much You know. Lululemon had really exploded but they weren't resonating necessarily with men. You know it was one of the fastest growing active apparel brands in the space, but men's was an afterthought. Yeah. We saw yoga and this active lifestyle for men as just a wide open space with nobody really competing for it. Yeah. And people were like, well what's the ip? Like, what's the customer acquisition hook? Are you guys digital marketing experts? You know? And, and we were kind of cut from the old school, like Chris built a legacy wholesale brand. Neither of us had a lot of e-comm experience or we weren't thinking through about the business through more of a tech or digital lens.

5 (31m 48s):
First we saw an opportunity to build a community around the brand there wasn different than what existed in the market.

0 (31m 55s):
And this was around 2013 when all those started you, you start to see an explosion of DTC companies raising money. Some of them succeeded, some of them didn't. But imagine that also some of the questions were like, so wait, you're gonna make like what? Like yoga pants or yoga tops? Like tell me what you're gonna make for guys.

5 (32m 15s):
It almost never even got to that point honestly. Hmm. I think when people realized that there was nothing proprietary or there wasn't a customer acquisition gimmick or hook to the business, a lot of meetings were short and there was a lot of passes. You know, it's just funny you You know when you talk about a relationship with rejection being a model and working in Europe, it was constant rejection. And then my experience at Vaco to trying to be a salesperson when I was a pretty shy guy naturally. Yeah. I developed a really unique relationship with rejection and so there wasn all building my backbone up for trying to raise capital for an apparel brand. 'cause it was kind of like starting a band and telling your friends, you're gonna be the next Rolling Stones. People are like, yeah, good luck.

0 (32m 55s):
Yeah.

5 (32m 56s):
But nobody was interested in investing so

0 (32m 59s):
Well yeah, I mean, and and I'm sure they were like, yoga guys aren't guys aren't gonna buy yoga gear. Yeah. That's, they don't do that. They just weren come in with their Adidas and Nike shorts. Yeah, I mean I I I remember going to yoga classes in Nike shorts. That's what I would do. Yeah. I didn't think too much about it. So I imagine the pushback was like it's, it works for women in Lululemon because yoga is still perceived to be like sort of a sport for women even though that's not true. But I think that would've been the pushback you were getting.

5 (33m 34s):
Yeah. You know, we saw the success Lulu was having, they really defined a new category with active, they were working with better materials. You know the dirty secret in our space is that the big brands You know they were really premium footwear offerings, but they never really had a premium apparel offering. Yeah. Whereas like Lulu inherently was working with fabrics that were much more expensive. So before you did any cut and make of the garment, just the textiles, which is a huge ingredient in making a great garment, they were just better. Yeah. And so we wanted to do something really cool premium and do something for men. And it just did not exist in the market, but

0 (34m 12s):
Probably it could. And Lululemon is, there's a, a femininity about the name too. Perception, probably Lululemon. So, and I say this as somebody who has some Lululemon apparel for men, but I imagine that people at the time that you're trying to raise money from would've said, well if Lululemon wants to do this and it's it's not working, what, why? Why are you gonna work?

5 (34m 38s):
I don't remember that question specifically, but I think in just in general, people looked at me, somebody that didn't have a track record of success and apparel. And even with Chris You know Chris was there because he had a great background. He had had some success in consumer retail with in footwear primarily. But they just looked at us and said like, no, the, these aren't gonna, I You know, I think some people saw the opportunity but maybe questioned whether I was really gonna be the guy there wasn able to go and do this and disrupt this space.

0 (35m 10s):
So any luck raising money from private equity or, or VCs in 20 13, 20 14?

5 (35m 16s):
No, nothing. Nothing. It was, it was really challenging.

0 (35m 20s):
And and how much were you, how much were you looking to raise?

5 (35m 23s):
I think our original goal was $2 million.

0 (35m 26s):
You couldn't raise the money from pri so I, from what I understand, you decided to go to reach out to your network of friends and family to raise the money. Yeah,

5 (35m 37s):
I think our first raise, we had a goal of a couple million dollars. I think we raised 400, like 400 to 500,000 somewhere in that range. And there wasn enough for us to get started and start working on samples and starting to, to bring some products to life. Alright,

0 (35m 53s):
So let's talk about now, next step. You raised a little bit of money, you're on this full-time and it's just you and Chris, but, but who, who, who is gonna help you? So let's just start with just designing the apparel. Did you have somebody that you could work with or that you could source?

5 (36m 10s):
Yeah. So You know Chris had some experience with a woman named Rebecca Bray, who he worked with back in his action sports days back dating back to Planet Earth and You know Chris always felt Rebecca would be a really good fit for Fiori. And we sat on a, on a, a, a couch in Chris's living room and talked about the vision, the idea for the brand. And, and she just loved it. She, she just saw what we saw in the active space. And so we, we hired her almost as a consultant, an independent contractor. And in the evenings I would You know, go over to her house and we would chip away at it.

0 (36m 49s):
And tell me how you would do that. Like you, you would say, I'm looking for like this kind of waistband and, and this kind of fit. Like what would you say? How would you describe what you wanted?

5 (37m 3s):
Yeah, I mean the first thing we were aligned with was like, we wanted to create we more casual point of view in the category. You know, there's a, a saying in our space that You know activewear is turbo meaning it's like, it looks like really technical activewear product that identifies you as somebody that's going to the gym or competing in a sport. You know. And we wanted to be the antithesis of that. So we wanted it to be effortless, easy to wear. We wanted to have functional details that would support you through a workout, but we wanted to almost hide them from eyesight. And it wasn't that turbo kind of technical look and feel there wasn so commonplace in the active market.

0 (37m 44s):
Y You know, speaking of, of technical performance wear, right? Like, I mean how did you even know what kind of fabric you wanted? You didn't want like stretchy right? Tight fitting pants. You wanted something but not like loose like eighties sweatpants or thick. You wanted something thinner, lighter. I mean, how did you even know what kinda material you wanted?

5 (38m 4s):
Well it's been an evolution. This industry was just being developed. Premium activewear was, was very new. Yeah. And so where to go for sourcing? It was a puzzle. It was, it was like a scavenger hunt to figure out where to go to source. So the first products we brought to market was, our first product was the, the core short for men. And it's still our bestselling men's athletic short. And the idea was to create a, a short that almost looked more like a board short there wasn designed for surfing so that it would resonate with our community. But it had a built-in supportive liner. It would support you through a great workout. It would move and stretch with your body. It had an elastic waist. Yeah. And we put a draw cord on the outside of the shorts there. wasn Natural that just looked more West Coast, more California esque in its aesthetic.

5 (38m 49s):
Alright,

0 (38m 50s):
So, alright. So when did you, so you, you basically You know 2013, you kind of jump into this fundraising trying to get in You know, do the designs you bring in Rebecca, Rebecca Bray is her name. I I think, right? Yeah. And how long before you land on the design where you're like That's it, that's the one. Do you remember how long it took?

5 (39m 13s):
We loved the core Short You know when we brought that short to market and we started showing buyers across, whether it was big national chains or it was fitness stores, they looked at it and they were scratching their heads like, what is this? It looks like a swim. Short You know this isn't activewear and You know we, we even had some activewear buyers tell us this is never gonna sell in New York City. You know maybe on the West coast, but, but never here in New York. but there wasn there wasn it, it was the core short there. wasn our first product. We were like, this is the one.

0 (39m 42s):
Alright, let me, let me back up and fill some gaps in before you go to market with this. So you've got a design and by the way, were you able to hire anybody else or was it really in the first year just bringing in consultants?

5 (39m 57s):
Yeah, so You know, it was really myself and Rebecca initially, and then the first person we hired with the little fundraising that we had done. 'cause I, I chose not to take a salary from the business just to be able to keep the lights on longer. The first person we hired was Nikki Lio, who is our C M O today. And Nikki's been with me since day one. Rebecca's still with us today, but, but Nikki had a, an incredible marketing background. She was most recently before Vuori with a company called Prana, which is like a outdoor kind of climbing Patagonia esque brand. And then also she worked in the surf industry. She worked for a company called Globe and Op back in the day.

5 (40m 38s):
And so she had this interesting hybrid background between action sports and surf and beach culture and yoga and performance and outdoor.

0 (40m 48s):
Alright, so you, you sort of land on a design for the shorts. Where did you source the place there? wasn gonna make you the samples.

5 (40m 57s):
So Rebecca brought in a gentleman who she had been working with in another business that did some golf type of apparel. He did some surf apparel. Yeah. And he was an agent and he represented a factory in China that had some experience working with these types of stretch performance materials. And so that's who we contacted and, and started working with on the these first designs.

0 (41m 25s):
How did the, those initial samples come out? Were you happy with what they made?

5 (41m 30s):
No. The first samples, the fabric was way too heavy. The prints weren't executing properly, the liner didn't fit well and You know today, it's funny, we have these big technical design teams then they're pattern makers, they're experts in making product fit exceptionally well. In those days it was Rebecca and I, we were winging it You know we would get a sample in my size, I would try it on and we would talk through how to change the fit and we would try to communicate that to the factory and then we would get another proto back. Our vision is to create the best product on the planet. But when we started the product kind of sucked. Hmm. And we had a lot of work to do to improve it. Alright.

0 (42m 9s):
And so it took you about a year and a half right before you were ready to launch that first product. But before we get there, did it feel like your pace was the right pace? Or did you feel like it was taking too long?

5 (42m 24s):
I think at that time it felt like it was taking a, a long time. Obviously I was a little naive. I hadn't built an apparel brand with offshore production and all the complexity of sourcing these types of materials. And then from product ideation and design through like delivery of production, it's a long time. And so to be chipping away at something to be burning capital and not being in market, getting real time feedback can feel like a, a slug, it can feel like a really long time.

0 (42m 54s):
So what were the biggest, I mean the biggest obstacles presumably were just, I mean there was everything, but what do you remember in that, in that first year and a half, just getting frustrated over You know what kind of things like were driving you crazy?

5 (43m 10s):
Well, They, weren, other brands that were launching around the same time that had similar ideas or similar takes on this category, whether they were women's or men's. But we were, we were hearing that some of these brands were having a lot more success raising capital than we were. And so I developed a complex that man, these other brands have a lot more money. They just weren outspend us. They just weren outmarket us and ultimately just beat us to market with a similar idea. Hmm. Because You know here we were, we had raised a couple hundred thousand, $400,000. I wasn't paying myself. We were working in a garage from one of our investors that that didn't require us paying rent.

5 (43m 51s):
And it was a true bootstrapped business. And, and I had a You know a little bit of an insecurity around whether or not we could go out and compete with these brands that were raising a lot of institutional capital and getting big kind of retail names on their boards. And there wasn really nerve wracking

0 (44m 11s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Joe and his team embark on a risky new strategy when their first business model does not pan out. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

Chomps (44m 31s):
Are you feeling like a snack time slacker? Well, chomps will be a game changer for you and for your taste buds. Chomps make snacking simple. Their tasty meat sticks are packed with mouthwatering flavor and only the best real ingredients. Each delicious chomps meat stick as the protein your body needs over nine grams per stick without any unhealthy additives and zero sugar. They're low carb, keto friendly, allergy friendly, and don't contain any fillers. Chomps are simply made with natural ingredients you can feel good about. Right now, chomps is offering our listeners 20% of your first order and free shipping when you go to chomps.com/built. Go to chomps.com/built for 20% off your first order and free shipping. That's C H O M ps.com/built. And don't forget to use our link so they know we sent you.

Wondery (45m 31s):
Hey Grownups, the cat in the Hat Cast is a new podcast from Wondery Perfect for the whole family. Join the cat in the hat and your favorite Dr. Seuss characters as they get whisked away on a new adventure every week. Fish dreams of creating his very own polite and quiet podcast. That is until he gets a surprise visit to his fishbowl podcast studio from the cat and the hat himself. And it becomes very clear that the cat has other plans for the podcast. And those plans are the opposite of quiet. The cat may be disruptive, but it turns out he's also a great help to get fish out of all kinds of predicaments. Sing along to new favorite songs. Try your luck at Titanic tongue twisters and have some fun with wondrous wordplay. The Cat in the Hat Cast will keep you laughing during all of your family adventures. You can listen to the cat in the Hat Cat early and ad free on Wondery Plus join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Wondery Kids Plus on Apple Podcasts today.

0 (46m 41s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. So it's 2015 and with dwindling cash and an eye on competitors with a lot more money, Vuori launches its first products into the world.

5 (46m 55s):
The initial idea was that we would sell through gyms and yoga studios. You know and Studio Fitness was exploding. So these concepts, whether it was SoulCycle or it was CrossFit or You know Orange Theory or Equinox, They, weren Studio, Fitnesses concepts popping up everywhere. And so you were seeing a lot of women's brands that were popping up, that were selling in these studios and gyms and building great little businesses, but there was never an offering for men of any, nothing really substantive. Yeah. And so Vuori felt like, well we can be that brand and You know it may not be a huge business, but a great jumping off point to kind of get get started.

0 (47m 38s):
Alright, so you start to roll it out. Like do you remember how much money you guys spent on your first order from the factory in China? Was it You know half a million dollars? I mean, was it a, was it a big purchase?

5 (47m 51s):
I think it was less than that, but we ordered 500 units per color of a, I think like three items. It was the minimum order quantity, but it was maybe like a, I don't know, a hundred thousand dollars worth of inventory. Yeah.

0 (48m 6s):
And you ended up getting them into places like Equinox and CorePower from the get-go?

5 (48m 13s):
Not initially. We were selling into a lot of more independent yoga studios. Yeah. You know your one-offs or, or chains that had three or four doors. I don't think the product was quite ready for national distribution with CorePower or Equinox at that time,

0 (48m 30s):
But presumably, I mean, this is the way to go, right? 'cause you're gonna expose your brand to your audience.

5 (48m 38s):
You know we got some sell through, but it was typically when a guy left his shorts at the office so he didn't have something, he would buy a pair of our shorts. So there was that. And it wasn't just yoga studios. We were selling into some surf shops, some outdoor shops. We were calling on the big guys and trying to get meetings and we, we actually did get a lot of meetings. I remember the first trip I took was to New York and I just packed a suitcase and I toted my, my products around, walked into a bunch of different gyms and, and talked to some more sophisticated buyers at specialty shops and, and people just looked at the product and they didn't really get what we were trying to do again, it just looked very different. It didn't look like activewear and therefore we got a lot of passes.

5 (49m 23s):
And, and keep in mind this is at a time when premium activewear wasn't a category there wasn sold at Nordstrom. It wasn't sold at r e i Yeah. Or Outdoor shops. Yeah. So, if you explain to somebody that you are gonna build this premium men's activewear brand, people just weren, like that's not a top priority for our business. You know right now we have a challenge where everybody's wearing Lululemon. All of our female customers are wearing Lululemon. If we're gonna get into activewear, it's gonna be a women's brand to address the need for to service that woman. Yeah. So yeah, that there wasn a really low point for me because You know we, we just didn't know if our business strategy was gonna work.

0 (50m 8s):
Did you think that maybe you were wrong, maybe guys aren't looking for this?

5 (50m 15s):
I mean, I knew that our community was, I I just, I saw it so clearly and I believed it wholeheartedly, but of course You know there was definitely that You know a lot of self-doubt. I would go home to my now wife at, at the time she was my girlfriend and You know I had some really long nights and You know I was just doing a lot of self-reflection here. I was somebody that had thrown away a career at a company that I had built to pursue something You know with a lot of friends and family money and it wasn't going really well. And so yeah, those were, those were some dark days.

0 (50m 58s):
Hmm. And, and I, I, I mean I guess pretty much within a year after you launched you, you sort of realize that your, your strategy isn't working and, and so you guys, you do like a major pivot and you just, I guess you decide to start selling direct to consumer. Yeah. I mean at that time You know DTC was starting to take off. So was it clear to to the team, like, You know we gotta go do this, we gotta just try and, and sell through websites.

5 (51m 31s):
I think it was scary You know we had a little bit of capital left and so we, we did take some meetings with digital agencies that would help us with our advertising strategy. And what we understood was that you had to spend a c a certain amount of dollars in order to get enough data pushed through your website so that you could then be responsive and, and make adjustments and ultimately find your customer online. And so the idea of taking Yeah, the little precious capital that we had left and investing it into what appeared at the time, having no experience in digital advertising, it just appeared.

5 (52m 11s):
It was like you were just blowing it into the wind. Yeah, there wasn really scary because if it didn't go well and we didn't define this engine of growth quickly, we were gonna be out of business and that would've been lights out game over.

0 (52m 25s):
Who, who, who is the marketing strategy? I mean, how did you find the right, because there are hundreds of digital marketing companies that were pitching you and how did you land on the right one? Well,

5 (52m 37s):
You know, it's so interesting 'cause back in those times, my reflection was that advertising on search was very much a proven industry, but social advertising was very new and we got a list of names and we ultimately landed on a, a digital agency that You know we trusted. And so I remember You know we got started in this advertising and we started paying a lot of attention to the ads and what was kind of getting a better response than others. And You know after an okay response, like I remember our first month we invested $5,000, we got $5,000 back. And so we were like, okay, we just gave away essentially a lot of product, but we got some new customers wearing the brand. Yeah.

5 (53m 17s):
The next month we invested maybe $7,000 and we got $8,000 back. And it was like that kind of a build. We were like getting our product back for our inventory or getting our money back.

0 (53m 28s):
And it was These were static ads that you would see on Facebook or were they videos?

5 (53m 34s):
Yeah, they were static ads. Oftentimes they would have a guide doing a yoga pose and then we would have a message on that image that said something like, versatility is a virtue or one short every sport. You know this is men's yoga, You know things along those lines. We were testing a lot of different copy. It was a really defining moment for me. I remember I was sitting on my couch on a Sunday and I remember I just, I pulled up Photoshop and I, I lined up all of our different colors and prints of this core short, this short that we had launched with there wasn, the, the differentiator. It was our reason for being. And then across the top on a white background, it just said run, surf, hike, train, travel, chill.

5 (54m 21s):
And the idea being conveying like that this isn't to be put in a box, like we're not gonna tell you one specific end use. This is a versatile athletic short. and that ad started to get really awesome traction and it was like, before you knew it, we were putting $10,000 in and we were getting $20,000 back in a month. And then we were putting $20,000 in and we were getting $60,000 back and all of a sudden we had this engine of growth that we could take back to investors and we could show them the data and You know while some guys were wearing it to yoga. What we heard loud and clear was that what, what people really loved about the brand was the product and its versatility.

0 (55m 3s):
And so I wonder how like, it seems like from the, really from that moment, right when you go DTC, it's working, but you also decided to work with retailers, brick and mortar stores as well. And a lot of DTC brands then even now won't do that because you can make a lot more money just selling direct to consumers. Can you kind of gimme, sort of help me understand why you wanted to work with brick and mortar and do DTC?

5 (55m 31s):
I think partly because we had to outta necessity, You know we weren't flush with the capital. And so keep in mind like over, so over the first few years of the business, we raised $2 million of, of capital from friends and family, no financial institutions. Some of our competitors had raised 2025 upwards of $50 million. We couldn't compete with them solely on the social playing field. So we knew that we needed to compliment what we were doing and we needed another customer acquisition vehicle. And we knew that wholesale could be a, a critical component of that. So after kind of hitting the pause button on wholesale while we were developing and building our digital community, once we established an engine of growth and we got outta the gates and these wholesale accounts could take note of what we were doing.

5 (56m 24s):
A lot of the noss that we originally got when we first showed the samples to these buyers turned into yeses.

0 (56m 31s):
Were you under pressure to sell at different price points? I mean, were, was it the same price in those stores as it was in the website? It

5 (56m 39s):
Was the same price, but because we were a premium brand, we sold a little bit higher than where the market existed for wholesale. So activewear in the wholesale market historically was dominated by Nike and Adidas and these big brands. Yeah. And they really didn't have a premium offering. So their athletic shorts might have been $52. Ours were 68. And so when we first launched, before we had built a direct community on our website, buyers would just say, we don't sell activewear at this price point. Yeah. Not only does this not look like activewear, but this is priced out of our range for, for our consumer.

0 (57m 16s):
So what'd you do?

5 (57m 18s):
Well, after building that model online and people started seeing that we were getting momentum, they were, they started changing their mind and we ended up getting a call from r e I, which is a really fun story. Nikki worked with a gentleman from Prana, her Prana days. He was in their marketing department at r e i, but she introduced me to him. I, I connected with him when I went out to Outdoor Retailer, which is a big trade show. But he took a meeting with me and just talked to me about R e I and the inner workings, and I brought him a bag of clothes and I just said, this is for your time. I just wanted to thank you. Hmm. We had didn't have any expectation. There was no ask of giving him that close. We got a call from him and he asked if it would be okay for him to connect us with the buyer, the activewear buyer at r e I, because he was wearing the hoodie that we gifted him in the hallway.

5 (58m 7s):
And the activewear buyer asked him what he was wearing. She said, I really like that hoodie. Who makes that? And he said, oh, these are, this is the startup down in San Diego called Vuori. And the next thing You know, we were on a plane up to Seattle to present the line to r e i and, and there wasn really the first big wholesale partner that we had as a brand.

0 (58m 27s):
So one of the things that happened during You know, sort of as you're building, 'cause You know you're still a small company. Right. But, and by the way, do you remember how long before you reached a million in revenue? Did that happen in in 2016? Or did it not happen until later?

5 (58m 45s):
Yeah, that happened in 2016. Let me

0 (58m 48s):
Ask you about competitors at that time, Rone Outdoor Voices, they were raising money, doing deals with private equity, bringing in big executives. Were you nervous when you were seeing the kind of money they were attracting and the deals they were doing at that time? Were you like, God we're in trouble, they could crush us.

5 (59m 6s):
Absolutely. And I felt like others might beat us in, in the market. They might end up just beating us to the ultimate goal that I think a lot of us saw in the market. And

0 (59m 15s):
Rone was kind of a com. I mean even now, but it was certainly a a, a bigger competitor at the time. Right?

5 (59m 21s):
Yeah. The, the c e o of Equinox once told me in a meeting that Rowan was like, biggie and Vuori was like Tupac because You know, they, they were originated on the east coast at a very similar time that Vuori started. They wanted to create a premium men's activewear brand. They kind of built it through the lens of the East Coast and that lifestyle. We saw the same opportunity, but we, we built our product and our brand and through our lifestyle and our community here on the West coast.

0 (59m 51s):
But they had an advantage, a, a, a financial advantage. Right. I'm assuming they had raised a lot more money than you had raised by the time, by, by 2017.

5 (59m 60s):
Yeah. They had raised a lot more money. And so again, real real reason for insecurity. You know when we showed up at trade shows, it was always Vuori and Ron as the only two premium men's activewear brands in a sea of women's brands. And so we were very competitive with them. We were very in tune with what they were doing. And, and yeah. So it was hard to see them have a lot of success raising capital when we weren't having as much luck.

0 (1h 0m 26s):
Were you, when do you remember feeling like, okay, we're, I mean, 'cause I think by 2018 you were gonna do maybe 30, $40 million in revenue that year. I mean, that's a massive jump from when you first launched in 2015 that year. Do you remember feeling like, okay, we're in a good place, like we are, it's all growth from here?

5 (1h 0m 53s):
Yeah. You know, I think it's two They weren, two things. We'd built a really great business online. The second was when r e I called and they wanted to bring in Fiori and they brought in some other emerging brands like Rone and some others. And then they brought in some legacy brands, the big names that everybody knows, and they put this activewear concept together on their floor, and they did it in 10 of their biggest metro market doors. And I remember the buyer the first time that I felt like we might be really onto something here. The buyer called me and said, Vuori blew out the competition and you guys had the most productive inventory in those 10 doors. Wow. And they were, they were very surprised.

5 (1h 1m 35s):
And so they asked us if we wanted to grow from 10 doors to 70 doors in the next season. But now this is the first time we had a data point where we sat on a national level with virtually no real marketing next to some of the best brands that we grew up aspiring to as kids You know. And, and having such, having so much success in that test really built a lot of confidence in the garage. So we were, we were really excited. And you

0 (1h 2m 5s):
Sort of now around that time got into the Lululemon space. Well, you already kind of were, but you released a women's line. I mean, was that because women were seeing men buying it and they were saying, Hey, why don't you make clothing for us?

5 (1h 2m 22s):
Yeah. It was always a vision to be a dual gender brand. And so we always knew women's would follow. We just knew that men's was the right business strategy to lead with. And so 2018 was when we decided it was time and we designed a very small capsule for women's and we brought it to market. And today 50% of our business is actually women's.

0 (1h 2m 44s):
You hit profitability I think within two years of launch, which is really unusual. I mean, part of it is your, your price point was higher, right? People were willing to pay 68 bucks for shorts, but part of that had had to have been efficiency. So what were some of the things that you did to save money to become profitable? Like tell me about some of the strategies you've used to become profitable within two years.

5 (1h 3m 11s):
Yeah. I mean, I was an accountant by trade. So conservatism I think was just embedded into who I was and as an operator of the business. But we, I never understood the idea of acquiring a customer at a loss. and that became a very popular trend is to You know you spend $200 to acquire a customer that would only spend $150 with you. And so after your margin and everything, You know you're losing a considerable amount of money. And the argument was, well, once you acquire a customer, over time, they'll continue to buy with you and they'll become profitable a year down the road or some, some time in the future. and that really never made sense to me because you always have to market to your customer to get them to reengage and buy.

5 (1h 3m 55s):
So we were very particular about the contribution margin of every dollar we spent on advertising. It had to yield a specific return. So there wasn one, You know. Number two, I never took a salary from the business. I, I, I lived very inexpensively in a little tiny apartment and I found ways to make my savings go a really long way. And then I, I made requests so the people You know that a lot of the people that joined me in those early days worked for a fraction of the price of what they were worth on the open market. And they believed in what we were building. And so we just, we were a true bootstrap business.

0 (1h 4m 32s):
So, I mean, basically this takes you to your first really big fundraise, which I think happens in 2019, which is $45 million. And this is really the first time you brought in a lot of money from an outside investor, right?

5 (1h 4m 49s):
Yeah. The business was growing really fast. And so we weren't in a place that we needed capital. And I think that's, You know, the funny, the funny thing about this entrepreneurial journey is like when you need it desperately it, it wasn't available, but, but as soon as we did it need it You know there it was. But we chose to partner with Norwest Venture Partners because they were really supportive. They saw the vision for the brand. Clearly they believed in us, they believed in the management team, and they, they wanted to be invited guests. They wanted to be aligned along for the ride, be helpful where they could be helpful, but not really disturb the creative nucleus that we cherished so much at the brand.

5 (1h 5m 30s):
And so, yeah, we, we raised our first round a a lot of the money ended up going to shareholders because the business didn't need capital. So we didn't go out and put a bunch of money on the balance sheet at that time because we didn't want it to create bad habits. We were very proud of the discipline and the financial rigor with which we were building the business. So we didn't want a big check to sitting on our balance sheet to disrupt that.

0 (1h 5m 55s):
So essentially a lot of early investors got some liquidity.

5 (1h 5m 59s):
Yes.

0 (1h 6m 0s):
So you are now, I mean, you've got some funding, but also it sounds like that you've got cashflow coming in. I mean, you, you're able to kind of grow simply through sales and You know from everything I've read. I mean, you hit 2000, 19, 20 are going great, and then you've got the pandemic, which of course would turn out very differently from how it started.

5 (1h 6m 28s):
Yeah. It was the, one of the scariest moments of my professional career. We got calls from all of our wholesale partners that said, You know, don't ship us any inventory, but we had inventory there wasn on boats or was already in our warehouse there wasn dedicated for them. When we got those calls, it was had a downstream effect. We called all of our suppliers and we said, please hold the production lines. Don't make us any more inventory. We've gotta work this out. And then quickly, as people started getting comfortable with their new lifestyle, they started shopping online. And all of a sudden what I thought was a panic and, and You know calling my suppliers and telling 'em not to make inventory, I called them back and I said, You, know what?

5 (1h 7m 9s):
I don't think we're making enough. And there wasn a rollercoaster of emotions over a couple month period

0 (1h 7m 16s):
And coming out of the pandemic, you, I guess were approached by SoftBank, the giant Japanese investment bank, SoftBank, to maybe make an investment. Did they come to you unsolicited?

5 (1h 7m 31s):
Yeah, we weren't looking for capital, but You know we had ambitious plans for Vuori and there wasn a really big moment for the brand because short of an I P O, I think it was the first time that maybe the market understood how special this business is that we're, that we're building.

0 (1h 7m 51s):
And it wasn't just an investment, it was a $400 million investment that valued Vuori at $4 billion. One of the largest investments and valuations to be made in a non-public apparel company ever. And for some people there wasn, the first time they heard of Vuori, like some people were like, V what, what, who $4 billion? What is this company?

5 (1h 8m 14s):
Yeah. We didn't have a real big share of voice in the media. We, we were kind of overlooked. And so there wasn a really special moment for our team because we all got to celebrate this, this incredibly special thing that we all built together.

0 (1h 8m 29s):
Joe, when you think about You know, growing up in, in Sean Island and then outside of Seattle and then trying modeling and a couple failed brands, and then really couple years of just really working hard just to, to get traction with this brand, how much of where you are today do you attribute to, to how hard you worked? And how much do you think had to do with luck? Just luck of people being interested in this product of the weird, odd luck of the pandemic, just all those things do, do you think that they matter?

5 (1h 9m 4s):
I think every little piece of that is a part of a big equation. I don't think there's one thing that defines our success. All those things that maybe have felt like defeat in the moment. When I look back with hindsight, I realize they were the biggest blessings and I, I didn't do this alone. You know whether Nikki and Rebecca in the early days You know Chris and the formation of the idea, like so many incredibly talented human beings that are still so close to me today. I think it all plays a part. The one constant is you have to work hard because luck might open a window or a door, but it's the hard work and the preparation that allows you to walk through it.

0 (1h 9m 50s):
That's Joe Kudla founder and c e o of Vori. By the way, his founding partner, Chris Miller, still sits on the company's board and If, you get a chance, check out some of the videos of Chris Skateboarding. He's won a ton of international awards and in 2015 he was inducted into the Skateboarding Hall of Fame. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Rommel Wood with music composed by Rum Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant. Our audio engineer was Gilly Moon.

0 (1h 10m 31s):
Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, JC Howard, Sam Paulson, Alex Chung, Kerry Thompson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Messi, and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Amazon Music (1h 10m 51s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today,

wondery Plus (1h 10m 59s):
or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If, you wanna show your support for our show? Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com.

0 (1h 11m 12s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Enbridge (1h 11m 19s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it. And it sounds like a wind farm powering homes across the country. We are bridging to a sustainable energy future, working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge. Life takes energy.