3 (0s):
Hey, it's guy rise here. You know one of the Hallmarks of economic crises like this one is that people actually start businesses slack betterment? Even Airbnb all companies. We featured on this show. We're all founded during the last economic crisis and a lot of people are talking about using this period now is a chance to reimagine what they do and if that's you well, I've written a book that you might find helpful. It's called what else how I built this and I wrote it for anyone who is starting a business thinking about starting one or just looking for inspiration and ideas from the incredible stories in the book The how I built this book is designed to be that voice in your head cheering you on when you're feeling like you just want to give up the book is based on interviews with hundreds of leading entrepreneurs and it traces at start a business or pursue a big idea and how to avoid the big mistakes along that Journey.

3 (59s):
Normally I'd be

1 (1m 0s):
Leaving

3 (1m 0s):
on a book tour at around this time where hopefully I'd get a chance to meet some of you and thank you for your support of our show. But of course book tours are all going virtual right now. So I wanted to make sure that you and our most devoted listeners get a chance to get a signed copy. And if you pre-order the book in the next few weeks before September 15th, I'll send you a free signed book plate that fits right inside. You can order the book, however you Get your books or you can find all the information you need at Gyros.com or how I built this.com.

3 (1m 40s):
So the how I built this team is taking a much-needed and very short break this week, but we will definitely be back next Monday with a brand new episode as for today's show. Well, some of you may remember a time not too long ago when e-commerce was supposed to be dead like over but today's episode is about two guys who never stopped believing in the internet or in the many things that you can buy on it this one. Just ran back in April of 2018. Enjoy.

1 (2m 14s):
So, all right. I'm going to read some of the websites that you guys

3 (2m 17s):
launched

1 (2m 18s):
hot plates.com. Assuming that sold hot place. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay all bar stools.com. So amazing. That's all. Yeah. You're doing good. You're doing good. All right might get her plate.com. Nice That's a classic. I love this one every grandfather clock.com very hot category online

3 (2m 37s):
who knew people are searching for that. We did

1 (2m 48s):
Robin PR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Roz and on today's show how an online search for birdhouses led to college roommates down in Internet rabbit hole that inspired one would become Wayfarer and e-commerce company that now sells almost five billion dollars worth of Home Goods each

3 (3m 16s):
year. So pretty much everyone we've had on the show had a

1 (3m 25s):
passion for a

3 (3m 26s):
product that they needed to put out into the world Lara American believe the world needed Larabars. Jenny Burton Bauer was convinced that her ice cream was gonna change how people thought about ice cream.

1 (3m 40s):
Even Jimmy Wales founder of Wikipedia thought everyone should have access to free

3 (3m 45s):
knowledge, but I'm here to tell you that that is not always the

1 (3m 49s):
case. In fact, sometimes the product isn't what drives the founders what

3 (3m 55s):
really drives them is the

1 (3m 56s):
challenge or rather solving the challenge and that's basically the story behind Wayfarer. Neither Steve conine or near add shop felt that strongly about home furnishings, but they did feel like people should have choices no matter where they lived because there was a time when if you lived in say Evansville, Indiana, you couldn't easily get this the same type of cool coffee table or sofa that someone in San Francisco or New York could get and today with ourselves almost 5 billion dollars worth of this stuff. Every year we fare was actually the third Company Steve and neeraj started together. They met as teenagers at a summer camp for Math and Engineering nerds in the early 1990s.

1 (4m 42s):
They quickly lost touch but then almost a year later as if fate herself was watching over these guys, they both Ended up as first years at Cornell assigned to dorm rooms on the same Corridor. Did you know both of you did you know that the other one was going to Cornell? No, we hadn't really kept in touch. So I think it was a it was a surprise. Yeah, pretty much I was like, hey, what's up? I've been this past year. So were you friends

3 (5m 9s):
like right away? Yeah. We were part of a you know, I think when your freshman year you start to have a small group of friends that you've sort of connect with and spend a lot of your time with and and we were in that group together and then Junior your neerja I started we got to be a lot closer and live together that year junior year and Senior year. We actually live together as well with it with a few other people up at Cornell. Yeah. Did you guys your kid you did you deceive used to talk about starting a business when you were in college? I don't know that we ever talked about it per se but our last semester at Cornell. We took an entrepreneurship course as one of our elective courses and in this entrepreneurship course, one of the things you had to do was create a

1 (5m 49s):
Plan and what really happened is through the process of doing the project which is creating a business plan. We basically started our first business. Yeah, it was 95 and it was a very early years of the internet the Netscape browser kind of come out that

3 (6m 2s):
year. Yeah. Our idea was actually to develop some internet directory services and we would go downtown and Ithaca New York and try to pitch companies. I'm paying us five bucks. I have a listing on in our internet directory. Of course, most of them. Look at this like

1 (6m 14s):
we're not a

3 (6m 15s):
few would say Hey kid, that's interesting. But you know, I don't even have

1 (6m 19s):
a home. On page they called us the time. Could you help me, you know build a website and you know, maybe at least get present on the internet and your what would that cost me? And so the business turned into kind of an Internet Consulting business at built sites for companies and you can kind of knew how to do the basics because you were engineering students exactly. So you go from Project to project and companies are trying to move very quickly, you know different people would ask other people in who could we hire so on so forth. We were

3 (6m 46s):
one of the few shops that actually done things when you would me When you guys should go and meet with clients. Did you ever get a feeling from any of them that they would look at you and think wait these guys have fired this like a 22 year old kid. What are you doing here? You know we did we're both were both pretty good sales guy. So I don't I don't remember that being snacking me too hard. I mean, I think that, you know, the price is where charging versus like what they would be looking at for consultancies. I think a lot of these bigger shops looked at it as like play money where their kind Of like well, whatever how bad can it go with a couple of college students who are doing this for us if it works out phenomenal if it doesn't work out, you know, whatever.

3 (7m 26s):
We haven't really we haven't really lost a lot. So I guess by that summer you've graduated from Cornell and then you decide to move to Boston to launch the company. Yes. So we had what happened very quickly as it sort of was clear while Ithaca is not really the right place to be New York in theory would be very logical is the place to be but we both had more of an affinity for Boston and we thought from And we could easily work with New York clients. What have you so we actually decided to move to Boston at the beginning of that summer and how are you guys managing? I mean if you were getting all these projects in coming in presumably they wanted the two of you to do the work. How are you managing?

3 (8m 7s):
All that work? You're working pretty hard. Yeah, we're working on Earth are weeks. I mean we were basically we set up the living room. We got an apartment and we flip coins on who got the the bigger bedroom and then I want it here. One it and the

1 (8m 20s):
living room was basically the

3 (8m 21s):
office right so just desks with a young computer and we work which was fine because you're working

1 (8m 26s):
from like 7 a.m. To midnight and then you're sleeping for a few hours and doing it

3 (8m 29s):
again. Was it exciting? I did it feel like you guys were building something really big. Yeah. Yeah. It was our first year out of college and it's a very young full of

1 (8m 40s):
energy. It's very

3 (8m 41s):
very all this hype around the internet and you know, everyone's sort of got their eyes on it looking at how you know, the potential of it is is you know, it's an area we first see new technology.

1 (8m 49s):
Envision the potential of very quickly. I think

3 (8m 52s):
it was it was awesome to be in the middle of it. But like what you guys call a company Spinners as you spin the web now.

1 (8m 60s):
Well, it's the World Wide Web at the time of really Coast Fitters, you know, if you're a spider's been

3 (9m 4s):
with oh, I see spin the

1 (9m 6s):
web like a spider. Oh, that's clever. Yeah, right. Oh my God

3 (9m 12s):
guys are super nerds. So how long did Spinners last but for years, so we started It in the summer of 1995. So I guess that's three years or the

1 (9m 23s):
fall of 1998. So maybe a little over three years when we sold it. So a little over three years. We're

3 (9m 29s):
about 40 people when we sold it.

1 (9m 31s):
Wow, and the internet had heated up a lot. And so there were certain to be some much larger consultancies doing the type of work we were doing and we didn't think we could scale as fast as these other ones. So we opted in the end to sell to one of them, but

3 (9m 45s):
would you guys sell it for we sold it for

1 (9m 49s):
competition? Equity I think it was 500,000

3 (9m 52s):
cash. So he's got like 250 cash. Does that sound right? I think my been a little more than that. I think we might have each gotten like half a million

1 (9m 58s):
cash and then and some stock and got Equity that was worth a few million bucks that then kind of with the.com boom kind of went up tremendously and then came all the way like all the way back down to zero.

3 (10m 11s):
That's where ya got to watch tens of millions of road. So you guys didn't really walk away

1 (10m 16s):
with a whole lot of money

3 (10m 17s):
from from that venture. No. No, I remember I have this Merrill statement that says I was worth twenty seven million when I was probably like a 24 year old and I'm thinking I'm all set and then, you know six months later. It was basically back down to 0. So at one point you are worth twenty seven million dollars when you're in your mid-20s and then yeah, but it was really just on paper. It was just on paper, but boy what a good lesson to learn as a young fellow. So this is

1 (10m 44s):
like the early mm mm, I guess

3 (10m 46s):
and and the two of you would guess decide to Start a new business together, right? We did. Yeah, we'd had a lot of fun and success in the first one is thought hey this entrepreneurship thing is easy. Let's just let's get something new and do it again. Yeah. Yeah, so that takes us so now we're at the beginning of 2001 and we're like thinking of different ideas and we're not sure what we want to do. Long story short. We came across this idea around mobile phones. So 2001 was still pretty early for mobile phone. Yeah, but we found that a lot of companies were starting to have a lot. Out of mobile phones, but they weren't really managing them. Well, because that effectively having a thousands of phones, but they were each a different contracts and they were on the wrong ones are paying too much for some too little for others.

3 (11m 30s):
So our idea was we would build a software platform that would allow these companies to better manage all their phones and their contracts and we thought overtime we could build that in to basically being a virtual carrier focused on Enterprises. What's a virtual carrier? Just just take a Virgin Mobile in the UK where either use a virgin brand name? And they actually operate on top of British telecoms Network. This is It's a branding on top of an existing Network. Got it to the consumer feels like they're buying Virgin

1 (11m 58s):
Mobile. They don't die by British

3 (11m 60s):
Telecom. Okay, what was a company called simplify mobile simplify mobile? Yes, but you would just call up companies the hey, can I talk to the person who handles your mobile phones? Yeah. I'm Steve Supply Mobile. I'm you know got a really great offering help you save money removal phones. Would you be you know, I love to talk to whoever manages that for you and occasionally you get someone right? Yeah we Did have one key Flagship customer that we had lined up who was very interested in doing it, which was Merrill Lynch. They cut the customer. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, they have big fun spent and so that was looking quite good and then unfortunately what happened in 2001 was, you know, say September 11th was a

1 (12m 38s):
huge impact for everybody and particularly for financial services companies and case of Merrill Lynch. They lost use of their headquarters in the world financial center

3 (12m 47s):
and they are priorities obviously had to draw we change so

1 (12m 51s):
with that we lost or the flagship customer that we had anchored around and so the combination of everything cause us to become much less

3 (12m 58s):
bullish on this idea that the odds of succeeding was just not high enough

1 (13m 2s):
seats interesting because many people that have been on the show have had similar experiences, but they've said, you know, we just kept at it the first year sucked and then the second year was less sucky, but we just kept at it and

3 (13m 15s):
in eventually it, you know took off like a rocket but you guys I just kind of came to this conclusion that it was not going to work. Yeah, I mean we were in a it was a business where you look around and we were the only one doing it and that's always kind of a scary spot. That is well and I think when we thought about the market potential in the odds and you know, what we what we've learned in that intervening year. I mean we spent by the last three months of that business literally just pounding the Yellow Pages like just coming in and just like taking rejection all day long and trying to see if we could how we tried just really hard to try to sell it and I as entrepreneurs. I think we bit of Fan of say link will lucky kid. He got to start with the sale and he can't sell anything. You don't have an idea and so, you know after kind of validating that I guess we sort of said it's time to walk away from this one.

3 (14m 1s):
Was that rejection hard for you to handle with a humiliating to just like eat away at you after a while. Not too bad. I mean, it's not a lot of fun. I remember my dad gave me some advice. He was a he was a stockbroker for years and he he said look when you go in and call it through the Yellow Pages. He's like the thing you have to do is set yourself. A goal and he's like your goal needs to be when you get 30 rejections. You can leave these like is that way if you look at it, every rejection is a good thing because it gets you closer to your goal. So keeps you motivated to working at it. You learn a lot more from when things are going bad and when things are going well, so I think we sort of we both like went out and started thinking about just getting a job and like I remember interviewing a few places and sort of you know thinking hey, maybe I should go the more traditional career route did that for?

3 (14m 43s):
I think we both did that some except for a little while and then I don't you just love being entrepreneurs.

1 (14m 49s):
When simplified mobile kind of like fizzled out you guys both were starting to approach you or 30s, right? It's yourself pretty young. Yep. Did you have a sense of what you were going to do? Next? Of course, you're gonna get into Furniture whatever information on the Internet. It's where it's all at. So, what did

3 (15m 8s):
you guys do? I mean you

1 (15m 9s):
win this business down. You're still presumably thinking let's continue to work together. We went right back to the drawing board. So we started looking at at that point we got very were you living in my basement

3 (15m 22s):
at this point? That's right. So I in your downstairs bedroom.

1 (15m 26s):
Yeah, so I was living there because we kind

3 (15m 28s):
of brainstormed stuff right and then my girlfriend at the time moved moved up from New York and I'm like honey is a great deal. We can just live here and the deal was he bought the groceries and we bought the groceries and that only lasts about two weeks though before she decided that we really should get our own place. That was the end of the free rent. But what happened after simplifying mobile what we decided We spent basically the first couple months of 2002. We ended up talking to a lot of different business owners and there's a theme that emerged because if you let if you read the New York Times and if you believe what the journalists said, you would have been left believing that e-commerce was dead. That was where all the Articles talked about, you know, because it was a bunch of companies that crash.

3 (16m 9s):
Oh, yeah big time. I think there was even at that time. There was a lot of skepticism that Amazon was going to succeed those. You know, there were a lot of people talking about Amazon's imminent demise, you know, yeah. And so we got fairly methodically so we'll get we should start looking at internet ideas. We know we know internet we know internet software should look at internet ideas. And then she look at other ideas that we think are just good business ideas were good operators. And so we started making lists of ideas. We started looking at businesses that were for sale thing that maybe there's something small that we could buy we really grow and through that we ended up tripping over these e-commerce websites that were for sale and we would talk to the owner operator and they would, you know, tell us how they're growing.

3 (16m 49s):
Going 20 or 30 percent year over year when you say e-commerce, what were they selling? I remember there's one lady who is selling bird houses. She was storing them in the garage every day. She was taking all the orders and collecting all the items out of the garage and packing them up and take them to the post office

1 (17m 5s):
and selling them online.

3 (17m 6s):
Yeah, Albert houses.com. Yes, it's the theme we found was really simple consumers had realized they could go online and search for any product category. They wanted there were a lot of product categories like bird houses that are just not The available locally with good selection. If you want to buy a birdhouse locally where you live today, where would you go? If you want a decent selection you go to like a like a local store and you can you find like two or three different bird houses and then you'd have to pick one of them exactly right and, you know pretty basic Styles right because they're only going to have for your for right and so all of a sudden people start to realize well, I don't have to be stuck with that. I can go

1 (17m 44s):
online and find a hundred different options. Exactly. I

3 (17m 47s):
can order whatever I want I say that The time of the trip to the store it'll show up in the mail super easy. And so the about a month's worth of research kind of helped us figure that out. And so what we ended up doing is we end up deciding that there was a big opportunity and buying these businesses. So the first website we ended up launching we launched a site called racks and stands.com the very end of August of that year, which

1 (18m 13s):
was TV stands and speaker stands. So it was entertainment Furniture. Did you have a particular passion? 10-4 I'm TV and speaker stands. I was a mechanical engineer out of Cornell. These things are sensible. But you know what you find it. Is there were in those days Yahoo on Yahoo! Search you could type in terms and we'll tell you how many searches a month there were for that item and on some of the product comparison sites. They would tell you their top hundred categories. And so both of those terms were in the top hundred search product terms. Wow. So people were looking for TV and speakers is why wouldn't they just go to their local like couldn't find? Anywhere that sells them the same thing about just selection of only two or three and you can't find a good selection.

1 (18m 53s):
The furniture stores want to focus on living room bedroom dining Furniture. So, where would you go? Yeah, so wait, so you you're thinking. All right. Our first one is going to we're going to sell TV and speaker stands. Just out of curiosity. Where did you got? Where where did you even go to find events occur stands? Well in the beginning what you do is you

3 (19m 13s):
go online and look for companies that made them you'd also look at what the other online retailers were selling. What brands do Have and you'd buy the audiophile magazines and flip through and see what brands are advertising. And so did you just buy a bunch of TV and speaker stands and just have them shipped to your apartment in Boston No. So at the time there was a bunch of electronics Distributors that actually Woodstock small amounts of speaker stands. And so we initially started off buying through them. So we'd buy out of their inventory. So we had no inventory risk. So it was all drop shipped out of Distributors and somebody would go to Yahoo or Google and type in speaker

1 (19m 47s):
stands and that was one of the things that would Magically

3 (19m 49s):
come up exactly they click into it and it's the promised land if you're looking for a speaker stands.

1 (19m 56s):
So when did you launch the website August 29th? 2002 2002 and how long before you had your first orders hours hours. Yeah ours when we come back how racks and stands.com then all barstools.com then every grandfather clock. Calm and on and on eventually turned into Wayfarer Gyros and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

1 (20m 41s):
Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to Comcast business Comcast business recognizes that your business needs to be nimble whether your customers want more than ever or your office is closed indefinitely. You can't just bounce back bounce forward with Comcast business bounce forward with internet speeds of up to a gig to the planning stage moves faster update your bandwidth. With a few clicks giving you the room to execute and get a network that helps keep your connected devices

3 (21m 17s):
protected. Learn more at Comcast business.com. Thanks also to Squarespace take your great idea and build a website with professionally designed templates visit squarespace.com and use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. With civil unrest the pandemic and the economic crisis. You want to know what's happening right when you wake up and that's why there is up first the

1 (21m 50s):
news you need in about 10 minutes from NPR news. Listen

3 (21m 54s):
every day. And just a reminder you can pre-order the how I built this book right now. And if you do I'll send you a free signed book plate to go inside. The book. The book is a collection of insights and wisdom from some of the most incredible and inspiring makers inventors Builders and dreamers on Earth to preorder and to get your free signed book plate while supplies last. Please go to Kyra's.com or how I built this.com Hey, welcome back to how I built this from and BR and Guy Roz.

3 (22m 37s):
So it's 2002 and Steve conine and near a Chaw are on their third business idea. They're selling

1 (22m 44s):
TV stands on the

3 (22m 46s):
Internet. It's a site called racks and stands.com and this is a time when a lot of people thought e-commerce was dead, but near urgent Steve they thought they was very It's alive so they started to advertise. Google had just launched AdWords which is you know, keyword bidding right people. Will you pay money

1 (23m 7s):
for yeah, you better need advertising regular

3 (23m 9s):
clicker and you write your text ad and you'd basically pay-per-click and we would track every time we got an order which advertising unit drove it. So we'd either bid those up or bend them down if they were non-productive and what kind of advertisements were they what they say the be text as its it, you know largest section

1 (23m 28s):
available TV stereo TV stands for Less hundreds

3 (23m 31s):
available racks and stands.com.

1 (23m 35s):
So if you were a consumer you click on this and if you are adventurous in 2002, you would put your credit card into the computer

3 (23m 43s):
and then it would go to you guys and then you

1 (23m 44s):
guys would order it from one of these companies and then

3 (23m 48s):
have that company directly shipped to that customer. Exactly. Correct. We launched at the very end of August. So September October November December the

1 (23m 55s):
4th month in business in December of

3 (23m 57s):
2002.

1 (23m 58s):
We did about $250,000 in sale in the category racks and stands raxus. And and we grew to

3 (24m 6s):
be one of

1 (24m 7s):
the largest or the largest online seller in the category.

3 (24m 11s):
And what happened is our supplier started telling us. Hey, you know, you've become my biggest online retailer of TV stands or speaker stands were having but you know my other online guys sell more of my beds or my other online guys sell more of my desks. And so we started learning that in fact these other firms Furniture categories that we hadn't focused on but that they were doing quite well online as well and I have to assume that just like getting this off the ground wasn't that expensive, right? It didn't require a whole lot of capital. No, it didn't let me some computers. We'd pay. I don't know $15 a month for hosting on a shared hosting platform and we had a couple computers in our office, but it was very expensive.

3 (24m 51s):
We didn't pay ourselves a dime for the first year and a half or two. That was the big the biggest leverage was that Didn't need to pay ourselves and that we knew how to also build the software and do the to do the do that work. We didn't hire anyone to do that work and in did you did you have like a number on the website like a customer service number the people who call and you know, I don't complain or we did it. There's for phone lines in my house at that. It would ring there right near my bed you and you were like one handy word like programming the technology the other hand you were picking up the phone. Yeah. Well, this is the beauty of that set up. It was near as nice as a little tiny table and we had four phone lines your kind of juggling. The phones were ringing we take customer calls and a lot of times we get off a call with a customer and we change what we were working on that day and my case I'd probably change what I was programming neeraj would you know, he was the data entry guy?

3 (25m 38s):
So like we keep you like he'd go line up the new products and we'd be like a customer is asking for this. He'd go figure out a source of heat added to the site and you know, those two activities rapidly made the site a lot better and it got to her we couldn't juggle for phone lines and that led to start hire people. So once you

1 (25m 52s):
start selling Rex it stands and you pretty well,

3 (25m 55s):
what's the next category you go to? Mounts TV

1 (25m 59s):
mount the mounts and we were surprised at what happened in that time frame. Also, the 2002 time frame is two different things TV mounts were not widely available. So if you had a gym and you want to hang some TV mounts like you didn't know where else to buy them so and so forth, but the other thing that happened is flat screen TV started really becoming more popular. Yeah, and so people wanted to hang those on the wall. And so our timing on that was quite good. So we saw this huge sales sort of start, you know, kind of momentum so So then we built a site just for that to have

3 (26m 30s):
every type you posed a called Mountain

1 (26m 32s):
more like more.com, but it didn't really matter what you called it, right? Because you would make her at the search all these were brilliant branding and the traffic was primarily driven by by these search by the advertising who do the paid search and other forms of advertising that we would do so that the key to the name of the site wasn't so much that it was something someone would type in or that would memorable or that pick it over other items. It was more that it made sense as a place you Go for this item. All right, so TV mounts and and then have that do

3 (27m 3s):
but it's normally well we were the mount Kings of the internet

1 (27m 5s):
my God. And so then what

3 (27m 8s):
what came next then we I think we started kind of a new beach at an outdoor furniture. And so we started a site called T quicker and more which was basically outdoor furniture. I mean, it's so interesting because you didn't

1 (27m 19s):
have to build a brick and mortar store and you didn't

3 (27m 21s):
have to stand outside in front with a sandwich board saying come on ten percent off today. Try our code samples like you just me just put

1 (27m 29s):
this out on the internet you figured out the search has search

3 (27m 33s):
worked and people that was a sandwich board. That was a

1 (27m 37s):
we paid Google to run the

3 (27m 38s):
sandwich board for us and you didn't have to take in any outside investment in at that time because the revenue from each expanding website was fueling the business was I mean this business is cool. It's from that day earlier is on it runs a positive cash cycle. So, you know customers would pay Right away and we didn't have to pay suppliers for 30 to 45 days. And so you had this kind of natural cash cushion. And so yes, it was, you know, it was we were able to self-fund it very well. Do you remember how how much revenue you were doing in? You know Arrow by like 2003? Yeah, since I was four, do you remember neeraj? Yeah. So 2000-2002 is our first year we did about 700,000 2003 was her second year.

3 (28m 25s):
I think we did about 7 million and in the following year 2004. I think we did 27 million. Wow. I mean you

1 (28m 32s):
probably had to just hire tons of people tons and tons of people fast. Yeah, so we

3 (28m 37s):
started hiring as early as January 2003. We heard a couple people then we probably ended that year with you know, 15 people or something like that and and then that became the model to grows, you know, we would be re investing aggressively by hiring people so that we could keep expanding the selection and expanding the categories which

1 (28m 58s):
Give us

3 (28m 58s):
more things to advertise which then would get us more customers, you know, and that was a virtuous cycle and we would take the

1 (29m 4s):
money that resulted and we would invest that into growing the team to keep driving it just out of curiosity when people asked you like, oh nurse, what are you up to? What are you doing these days would you say? Oh, I'm I'm selling TV stands or like how would you describe your business to people never one time? I was very uninterested in describing what we're

3 (29m 21s):
doing and a lot of Indians in the

1 (29m 23s):
United States are doctors. They assumed I was a doctor and No, no. No,

3 (29m 29s):
I'm into so I talked to Shawn. Oh, no, I'm not a

1 (29m 31s):
doctor. I just sell Furniture because if you say you sell Furniture no one's interested. There's no problem. It's like silence is the conversation. Oh, I see. Yeah, that's a good way to wrap up the conversation. So obviously when you were doing is of course what eventually would become waiver, but at this point you see you start calling it I think CSN stores, right? Yeah. That was really I think David 2002-2003. We adopted that it's a great name. SN stores forget this whole did you get a bunch of Consultants to help you figure out that name? No, we could get it for 12 bucks a year and there is no trade. My issue is I think you're just came up with it was our initials kind of conglomerate.

1 (30m 12s):
SN o KO 9. Ko9 Steve Shaw nearer Jesse's overlap. I got you. It was a generic name. We could use across any category, you know, we and and helped with two key things. Basically one is we needed a company name that you know sort of implied. We had a Lot of stores count right? Yes. Yes as good or you don't want to just name it after one of the names,

3 (30m 32s):
right? The second is a lot of the suppliers are very traditional companies. And so when we would go to like the High Point Furniture Market and approach suppliers, you want to be able to get into a conversation with them and during this timeframe 2002 2003 2004. There's there's still not very keen on e-commerce. They're not they're not dead set against it but their experiences have been poor and so what happens when your badge says CSN stores and where you based so we're in Us to know we're in Boston over right in Back Bay. We have an office on Newbury Street. Oh great. Oh what you guys focus on. Oh, well, we really focus on entertainment Furniture. What do you carry? Oh, we carry brand this brand that brand. So the brand. Oh great you get into a conversation and and they say well, what are you interested in?

3 (31m 15s):
Well would really be interested in this selection. We think would do well for these reasons that it uh, and they say, oh, well, you know, how big is your store is at that point you'd say, you know, you'd be honest you say. Well, we actually we sell online. And if you head to discuss online too early in the conversation, you get kicked out of the show. They didn't want you. They don't want to in Bok Min conscious like you shop.com they knew right away and it's an internet guy, but now they've gotten into a 20-minute conversation with you and you sound very rational and you're carrying a bunch of good brands. So now they're like, well, you know, I don't really do much e-commerce business, but maybe maybe this does make sense. Let's have a little more of a conversation. So the generic name helped you get deep enough into a conversation for them to really consider.

3 (31m 58s):
And understand you which was really important in those days.

1 (32m 2s):
So all right, I'm gonna read some of the websites that you guys launched because I just think they're amazingly straightforwardness hot plates.com. I'm assuming that's old hot plates. Yeah. Okay all bar stools.com. So why do you think that's okay? Yeah, you're doing good. You're doing good. All right, my dinner plate dot-coms. That's a fight. Yeah. I love this one every Father clock.com

3 (32m 30s):
very hot category online tasteful the ship who knew people are

1 (32m 34s):
searching for that. We did you can look on that was I mean, you would find categories and then you would basically get these different domain names and you started to build a huge business that way.

3 (32m 49s):
Yeah. He got urea 250 of these.

1 (32m 52s):
How are you managing 250 different websites had to even get your head round that we I was very

3 (32m 58s):
We had a very good Tech platform that was built around the idea of building. We had a centralized product catalog and then when calls came in our call system would tell you exactly where the call was coming in to seeing you had to answer the phone.

1 (33m 9s):
Did you ever have a situation where somebody call the customer service number for,

3 (33m 13s):
you know racks and

1 (33m 14s):
stands.com and then said and then to oh thanks, you know, I'm still looking around and then call the customer service number for you know

3 (33m 20s):
mounts.com and then get got the same customer service rep on the phone. Oh, yeah when it was just yours and I working to have it all today are so hated. I just talked to you Rex and stands.com. They usually didn't put it together. It

1 (33m 32s):
was funny. It was a funny thing you even tried to hide

3 (33m 35s):
it from them, but they just they wouldn't put it together. I've heard that if I think by 2010 you hit almost 400

1 (33m 43s):
million dollars in sales,

3 (33m 46s):
you'd almost 5 million customers and and you would like this this aggregation of 250 websites. Like nobody would have known what CSN stores necessarily was. No one knew who you

1 (33m 58s):
I swear

3 (33m 58s):
I mean people just knew. Oh barstools.com or my dinner plate.com. Yeah, they didn't know those that well. Yeah, I mean was that quiz that crazy to you guys that that that much revenue was coming in. Oh, well, you just too busy to even stop and think about it. I mean, it's like washing your kid grow up a little bit like it's just happening. So incrementally and you're just following this Playbook that you've got this working. Well that, you know, didn't I don't I mean when you step back from in think like oh, wow, this is actually gotten huge. You know, you try To do to do that too much because it gets scary and how about your your your relationship between the two the two of you? I mean, it's just you guys are wired in such a way where you just kind of chilled out and get along and you don't have any tension.

3 (34m 41s):
I mean, it's just it's it

1 (34m 43s):
is crazy that you're still

3 (34m 45s):
after all these years from like high school. You're you working together. No, we gosh it's interesting. You know, I when we would when we first started working together, I can remember having arguments where he was usually right? He was telling me something I needed to hear but I really didn't want to hear it. And of course my motion would flare up and I remember having to walk out of the room and just be like I got to go walk around the block and you know, just be cursing under my breath out of me for half an hour when we got into this business, you know, we were a lot more mature as individuals that had been through a lot of that had both gained and lost a lot of money together. And so I think you know greed is one of the things that can create a lot of tension in Partnerships. I think we'd gotten past a lot of that and we'd also gotten to where we valued each other's advice.

3 (35m 28s):
Vice and had gotten and gotten to the point were like look. I trust what he's telling me because he cares and he actually is trying to make me better make us better as a company. Yeah, there's wood. What do you think II think the two key things that I think I've always helped us one is that we gravitate to different areas of the business in the second is we definitely have always found each other to be very hardworking and very committed to it. I think those are not to be taken for granted because I do think they those traits may not be as common as As you would think yeah in 2011, I guess it was when you decided that you you needed to scale this even bigger.

3 (36m 8s):
And this is the first time you actually took in outside investment. Why did you allow Venture capitalists to get involved in this in this company? We're definitely ones who would rather just funded ourselves yourself fund the business and have it funded self the challenge became in 2011 we We believe the big opportunity to continue the trajectory and to really capture the big opportunity. We needed to build a brand and the amount of capital we thought to go through that migration and to build a brand that it would take was not an amount. We could sell fuss.

1 (36m 41s):
You did not have a brand CSN was not

3 (36m 44s):
enough brand write it what you know consumers didn't know that brand it wasn't you want a brand that one? You know, you think hey, I need to shop. I want to redo my living room. You want someone to think? Oh I go to Wayfair. You want it to be a top of mine brand for a category, right? And that is not that's not easy to do and even if you figure out how to do it. It's not inexpensive by any stretch, right? So there we wanted to be able to do that the other just minor Dynamic I think that happened is investors. They started to change their pitch to being purely from we want to invest in by party or company to hey will invest in by part of your company invest in it, but we'll let you guys take some cash off the table as well and you know at that point in our lives with we both got married.

3 (37m 26s):
I had some fat kids face near to Kids as

1 (37m 28s):
well being able to take

3 (37m 29s):
you know a bit of money off the table as part of an

1 (37m 32s):
equity was also appealing and so there's a, you know, those things kind of

3 (37m 35s):
tied together and at that time

1 (37m 36s):
in our lives so you had 250 websites under CSN stores at how did you how did you come up with the idea for Wayfarer?

3 (37m 45s):
But we knew we knew we wanted a different name. The CSN named Susan

1 (37m 49s):
stores name was difficult for people to remember recall. We've always been reluctant to use Consultants,

3 (37m 54s):
but we hired a branding

1 (37m 55s):
agency

3 (37m 56s):
and they came up.

1 (37m 58s):
The name Wayfarer and it's you know, it's a made-up word.

3 (38m 1s):
The two words way in Fair. We like to positive kind of shop, you know

1 (38m 4s):
terms the domain name was also

3 (38m 6s):
available. And so you were going to go out and spend you know Millions trying to buy domain names from people you could you can just register it and kind of be Off to the Races so it took about a year for all these sites to kind of consolidate under way for and to the consumer Wayfarer seemed like a brand new thing right the did. Yeah. Yeah. It just kind of came out of nowhere. Know where people are kind of like wow. This is a cool place to shop for home. And it's the fact that you guys got into HomeGoods it had to do with the fact that people were searching for these products. In other words. You could have ended up being a company that sold like personal grooming products, right? Yeah, and the one thing I would say, you know home the beauty of home most categories people want to go by the same thing as each other, right?

3 (38m 55s):
So, you know double a batteries You by Duracell or energized

1 (38m 58s):
Or the private label.

3 (38m 60s):
There's only a couple categories where a huge selection is really a key piece where Visual and aesthetic considerations are very Paramount where people want unique items and the two are really fashion and home and we basically by focusing on home where the logistics are quite complicated and different where there are no Brands where the visual merchandising is critical where people have a very unique style. There's a lot of value can add as a retailer if Or in any of these other categories you'd certainly there's a big business there. But that's effectively the business that the Walmarts and the Amazons and the targets and the Costco's that they're all in that business selling the same exact items that everybody and you can fight that out and try to find an advantage.

3 (39m 44s):
But typically the advantage is either in price for Speed. There's really no other way to do it.

1 (39m 49s):
And so the beauty and home is that it's more

3 (39m 53s):
multifaceted and it doesn't what if

1 (39m 55s):
someone is a winner in these other categories it It automatically make you a winner at home. Your public company you are listed on the stock exchange, right? Yep, York Stock Exchange. And the company I believe is today is valued at more than 3 billion with the be billion dollars. I mean, could you imagine obviously we both you guys are so pretty on your in the mid-forties and I mean, you know, there's other things you could do conceivably do for lives. You could start guests could start another company. Could you imagine I don't know. Amazon or Walmart, you know coming to you and saying. Hey guys, we want to buy your company. We're going to give you x billion dollars.

1 (40m 38s):
Could you ever imagine accepting that or agreeing to that

3 (40m 43s):
you need to be prudent? Right so we know all those folks you of course would have conversations with anyone who wants have a conversation last year. We grew 40% from the year prior. The company is getting bigger at a fast rate. And if you believe you can do a lot for the customer that is more than anyone else. You can do well why wouldn't that continue to grow at a fast rate? So it's really super early days. If in fact we can be the best so it would be very premature to think about selling it. If we think we can win how much of the success of your partnership and and the businesses you built is

1 (41m 18s):
because of your intelligence and your skills and how

3 (41m 21s):
much because of just lock and Serendipity. Okay. Well near just skill. I just shoved show up to the office. Daily, you know, it's obviously a bit of both. I don't I don't know that there are dramatic intellectual skilled differences in humans in general. So I think it tends to be you know your ability to focus and keep doubling down on your own it believing in yourself and your work ethic and continue to focus on a narrow enough set of things you can win in and we've been good at kind of staying focused on that and not listening to the other people would tell you go try and do other things here. You know Serendipity and luck, but always play a little bit of a roll, right?

3 (42m 3s):
So I think that definitely is a PC anything about it. We happen to be in college in the last semester of college which happened to be the beginning of the commercial internet the commercial internet has created a huge amount of opportunity. Well, it was a different point in time with there been no opportunity. No, but there would be opportunity. Would it be as big maybe maybe

1 (42m 20s):
not would have been different possibly would have been as well suited to us. I don't know, you know, so I think there's a mix in there. I do think a lot of it is is how hard you go after something and help? Maduk you are about with all this stuff in home furnishings that you've done or either of you any good at interior design neeraj likes to think he has a design eye. He likes to comment on design. Let's say that then what about you Steve? I've a

3 (42m 48s):
very clean modern aesthetic in my Homestead near

1 (42m 50s):
just he has a much more traditional. Look your wife would probably kill me when she hears me say that exactly that's near and Sean and Steve conine founders of Wayfarer. I talked to them back in April of 2018 and today in the midst of a pandemic the company is actually doing incredibly well because so many more people are now shopping from home in the last quarter revenue and Wayfarer jumped to four billion dollars in the company just announced that its profitable for the first time since going public. And by the way one last question for you guys. What's the weirdest domain? And that you that you have registered.

1 (43m 32s):
What's the rooster Decor one

3 (43m 35s):
all rooster Decor.com. That's that's part of the best one.

1 (43m 37s):
Yeah, people want rooster Decor rooster Vaz is pitchers planners pots. You name it? It's got a rooster. We're going to try to find it and Source them sell it to you. I just cannot imagine having no bunch of rooster Decor my house, but that's just weird. Maybe I'm weird. Someday. You'll visit someone who's got a lot and thanks so much for listening to the show this week you can Subscribe, wherever you get your podcasts, you can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or as guy Roz. This episode was produced by Rachel Falkner with music composed by rum teen Arab Louis. Thanks also to Candice limbed Eric Gales JC Howard, Julia Carney leave a grant and Jeff Rogers.

1 (44m 23s):
I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this.

3 (44m 34s):
This is NPR.

1 (44m 39s):
Good question. That's a really good question. The great questions is free therapy. Thank you for asking me that God. That's such a good question. That's an interesting question. But what fresh air interviews are really about are the interesting answers. Listen And subscribe to Fresh Air from WHYY and NPR.