ZEN Insurance (0s):
Running, a new business can be stressful. And. the last thing you need is to worry about unexpected accidents or lawsuits. So. if you are an entrepreneur or startup owner, don't overlook the importance of liability insurance. It's a critical investment in the success and longevity of your business. Protect yourself, your assets and your reputation by securing the liability coverage for your specific needs. With a customized liability insurance policy. you can face challenges with confidence knowing that you have a safety net in place. Take the first step in safeguarding your business today. Go to zen insurance.com/save 35 for a free business insurance quote, Get the low cost insurance protection you need from Canada s. small business insurance experts.

Dell Technologies and Intel (51s):
Now your ideas don't have to wait. Dell Technologies and Intel are pushing what technology can do so great ideas can happen. Right now. Find out how to bring your ideas to life@dell.com.

NPR (1m 4s):
Welcome to now Black Perspectives haven't always been centered in the telling of America's story. Now. we are taking center stage introducing NPRs Black, Stories Black Truths A, collection of black LED stories from NPRs podcasts, search NPR r Black Stories Black Truths, wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (1m 31s):
Hello and welcome to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So it's not a coincidence that the more we're learning about Meat production and its impact on the planet, the more Meat alternatives we're seeing on the market. And we've talked to founders in this space before, like Pat Brown of Impossible Foods or Ethan Brown, no relation of Beyond Meat and If. you haven't heard those episodes. You should definitely go back and check those out. Just search for Ethan Brown, How I, Built This, pat Brown, How I, Built This, and you'll find them. My guest today is also working in the alternative Meat space. His name is Eshchar Ben Shire and he launched his company, Redefine Meat back in 2018 outside of Tel Aviv and Israel.

0 (2m 11s):
And unlike other companies, redefined Meat is using three D printing technology to create plant-based beef, pork and lamb products that really look and taste just like their animal-based counterparts. In fact, I've tried a redefined Meat steak and I was blown away. Eshchar grew up in Israel on a kibbutz surrounded by family and nature. His father worked with turkeys and his mom took care of dairy animals. And when Eshchar left the kibbutz as a teenager, he eventually got a law degree and then an M B A and went to work at Hewlett Packard in Israel where he first started to learn all about printing. And while he was always ambitious, he never thought of himself as an entrepreneur or a risk taker.

0 (2m 55s):
His plan was to work in a steady corporate job advancing gradually and slowly.

3 (3m 2s):
One of my closest mentors, he told me once that I should become a c e O one day. And in order to become a C E O you need to be first a product manager because then you're a c e O of a product. So I went to HP to become a product manager of a product.

0 (3m 15s):
And what was the product you were, you were looking after? I

3 (3m 18s):
Was in charge of basically helping packaging companies print packages that are made very fast and can be personalized so they can can write your name on the chocolate package, which is a very, very difficult technology, very exciting business that nobody knows exists because nobody understands all of these big industries that are behind the scene of all of our consumption.

0 (3m 41s):
So alright, so you were there for I think about five years or four, four or five years at, at hp. And, and while you were there, you met a guy named Adam Laha from what I read, who would eventually become a co-founder. And he was also working in printing.

3 (3m 57s):
So he was a product manager and he did the same revolution in the field of flexible packaging. So your Cheetos, your Doritos, everything that comes in a bag pouches. He developed and launched and sold the first digital production printing press for pouches and flexible packaging in parallel. So we, we had the parallel path.

0 (4m 16s):
Got it. While, while the two of you were there, did, did, did you ever talk to each other about starting your own business?

3 (4m 22s):
No, we, we actually talked about how we are not the type of people that are going to start our own business and that we, we are corporate, we are really good in corporate. and that one day we will both be CEOs or senior managers in big companies. This, this was like the vision then

0 (4m 38s):
That was your goal?

3 (4m 39s):
It was our belief, our belief that we are limited. Yeah. That we, we don't have this ability to take risk. We also became fathers at the same time, but we were also very frustrated because we were 30 at that time. And I told Adam, once we have 40 more years to work, what are we going to do in this 40 years?

0 (4m 55s):
So you guys are 30, still very young, but you're feeling like you're old, but your goal, your ambition 'cause you were not a risk taker. Right. Because a lot of people think that entrepreneurs are risk takers and they jump out of airplanes without parachutes and, and, and it's not actually true. But you really don't define yourself as a risk taker. And your path, your your path was like, I'm just gonna keep doing this and maybe I'll become a senior afic senior leader at hp or maybe I'll become a senior leader at another company.

3 (5m 23s):
Yeah. And also why would I take a risk when the career path is so amazing and so successful and it's actually quite interesting what I'm doing. I met great people all over the world. Yeah. I went to conferences. I, I could live the life that I thought were right for me, which was so different than my life of my parents that basically do what they want to do and not what anybody or the corporate world defines for them to do it.

0 (5m 48s):
It's interesting 'cause a lot of the, the entrepreneurs and founders we have on the show worked in corporate environments and found that they could not work in those environments because they couldn't deal with the meetings and the rigidity and, and the rules and the bureaucracy. But it sounds like you actually were comfortable in that world. Like you couldn't navigate that.

3 (6m 4s):
Yeah. And and I think it's very easy because it provides you with a lot of comfort and a lot of security. And also you, you tell yourself the story of why this is right for me, what is the reason that I'm very good at that and not where your creativity or your dream can, can come into reality because that's not an option. You need to say, my passion is really growing the amazing field of making printers more profitable. Yeah. So you need to believe in that until you find what is really right for you. Until you find this, this individual calling or purpose that you say, then it's not a risk then if, if I don't pursue this path, I'm risking something big. But I was the guy actually that killed for a lot of people the startup dream because I was very good in explaining why every startup will fail.

3 (6m 50s):
Oh.

0 (6m 50s):
So when people come to you and they say, Escar, I have this great idea. I wanna talk to you and say, well it's, that's not gonna work. You were the guy that was saying that to people. Yeah.

3 (6m 59s):
I was very good at that because also it's, it's very easy.

0 (7m 2s):
Yeah. Yeah. Alright, so you were at HP for a few years and then, and I guess you went to, to another company called Highcon, which was a startup that at that time was using three d printing technologies to I guess to create like foldable boxes. And and presumably that move was to become, I dunno, maybe eventually become the c e o of that company.

3 (7m 23s):
Yes. But it's also more fundamental. When my, my son was born, immediately I started thinking differently in what I'm doing and I said, let's go to something smaller, let's go to something that is different and, and not really be stuck in the corporate ladder. But I went to something that was already, I went straight into it being a VP marketing of a startup that I thought is going to grow dramatically really, really amazing people with a big dream and, and the culture of 100 people. It wasn't a tiny startup, but this culture of of we're doing something that will change the world. Yeah.

0 (7m 57s):
Alright, so you were there for about two years and obviously learning a lot about three D printing. So, so tell me, I mean, you're a guy who's not a risk taker, you're a corporate guy, you are gonna become a c E O, but you decided to take a big risk and start your own company. Tell me the genesis of this idea of thinking like, maybe I should start my own thing. How did that even begin?

3 (8m 21s):
So it's an intersection of two elements in my life actually. The, the real decision to take the leap into the deep water was when, when my second son was born, when my second son was born, I just quit my job without a plan. There wasn't a plan. It wasn't that I knew we were going to start redefined Meat. That is one element. The other element is that I stopped eating Meat. So I was a big Meat consumer. Really. You would ask me 10 years ago, what is my hobby? I will tell you Meat is my hobby. Wow. Because I, I, I love cooking and I spent a lot of time, we, we used to have a family restaurant and I used to spend a lot of time in the, the kitchen cooking. And I became fascinated about finding the best Meat and getting connections to the best butchers and getting notified when they slaughter a three week year old lamb.

3 (9m 7s):
And when my son was born, I stopped eating Meat, I started feeling bad. Why?

0 (9m 11s):
Tell me why you stopped eating Meat.

3 (9m 13s):
So there's a lot of reasons why people stop eating Meat. For me, it was the fact that you're eating somebody's else kid. I, I looked at my son, I have no three boys, and I said, I don't want to be eating somebody's else child. Wow. The other element, I took my son to the dairy farm, I still like to take my kids to the dairy farm. And when I was a kid, the dairy farm was romantic. It's the place where milk come from. And you have this amazing creatures now. It's really sad because you see the separation of calves from the mother cow and, and you see the pain and you see the suffering and you see the agony and doing it with your kids and explaining, so why are the kids there and the mother of there and what is happening to the kids and what will happen to the mothers later on.

3 (9m 53s):
It's really sad. And my, my brain made this connection between what I'm eating and the living creature that I know more than the average person.

0 (10m 1s):
So let, let's just step back for a moment and, and talk about You know part of the, I think part of the big picture around, around Meat in general, Meat consumption. And I, and I'll say, I say this as a Meat eater. I eat Meat this weekend and I I You know I do eat it, but I was reading about You know sort of the, the the carbon footprint of, of beef in in particular. And it's just, it just kind of outweighs every other You know animals. Like for every kilogram of beef, a hundred kilograms of carbon emissions are produced. And You know for poultry it's about 10 kilograms. So just You know completely o overshadows all other kinds of Meat production.

0 (10m 43s):
So beef is really long-term is a big problem. So part of this idea, I guess not just for you, but with other plant Meat companies, is to solve this problem to enable people to eat Meat without actually doing the damage that Meat production does.

3 (10m 60s):
100%. And and the challenge is that, that everybody's aware of the fact that beef consumption doesn't make any sense. Most of the food around the world goes to cows and not to human beings. The water, the cows basically are 1 billion population of 1 billion that eats more food and, and consumes more water than all of the human population. And we continue to raise these animals because they make a really tasty food product, not for nutrition. You, you can have nutrition by eating lentils or chicken, which is more effective. You can eat pork, which is, is not good for the environment. But we just enjoy so much eating beef because it's so complicated, because it's so rich, it's so special.

3 (11m 40s):
And almost every culture around the world elevates beef more than any other food product. And it's an expensive food product. And we buy more and more of that and the prices are increasing and the the environment is paying a higher burden.

0 (11m 53s):
Yeah. So it wa it was, that was it, it was simple as that. And, and I guess you're thinking about could there be something in plant-based meats that I could do

3 (12m 6s):
When, when I quit my job from Highcon with two, two boys, I, I had many options. The, the most immediate options was to find a new job. But, but there was this Notion of maybe there is a revolution in plant-based Meat. And maybe this is my purpose. My purpose is to take part in this revolution.

0 (12m 26s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back more from Eshchar about his leap into the plant-based Meat revolution, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This lab.

KiwiCo (12m 44s):
When I was a kid, I used to love building with Legos and Lincoln Locks. I would spend hours working on these elaborate creations, these villages and towns. And looking back I realized how that kind of play really helped me build confidence and develop a sense of wonder and creativity and curiosity. So fast forward to today and my kids for years have really enjoyed the incredible selection of projects from Kiwi co. Everything from solar power powered vehicles to robots. It's absolutely amazing the options that they have. Kiwi co projects are designed by a team of educators, makers, engineers, and Rocket scientists who brainstorm hundreds of ideas to create the most exciting, age appropriate and educational projects. And best of all, Kiwi Co gives kids the tools to learn new skills, build new experiences, and make connections to the broader world. Redefine learning with play, explore hands-on projects that build creative confidence with Kiwi Co. Get 50% off your first month plus free shipping on any crate line at kiwi co.com/built. That's 50% off your first month@kiwco.com slash built.

Mercury (13m 56s):
90% of startups fail 90%, just 10 out of every 100. Last. In order to succeed, startups need grit, talent and the ability to perform at the highest level. That's where Mercury comes in. Mercury is banking engineered for the startup journey, a modern solution to help your company become the best version of itself, to eliminate the hurdles that come with traditional banking, to offer a product crafted to help you scale with safety and stability, to go beyond banking and provide access to the foremost investors, operators and tools. Because when you can operate with competence, building your company becomes an art form. Join over 100,000 companies banking with Mercury at Mercury dot com. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and evolve bank and trust members F D I C.

0 (14m 55s):
One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. It's usually just at the top of the app and it's totally free. Welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. My guest today is Eshchar Ben Sheetrit, who back in 2018, quit his job without a plan to join in on the growing momentum around plant-based Meat alternatives.

3 (15m 28s):
So I actually emailed both Impossible and Beyond and told them you should start working on three D printed mid and I want to be the guy to do it. And they didn't answer. Hmm. But, but it was more on how do I get into this industry? So what is my reason to contribute something to this industry that I want to be a part of? And and it was a nice story. I know printing, I know three d printing, maybe there is a story we can tell of how three D printing can help. And then I'm the expert and who else in the world Yeah. Is a three D printing expert that has a passion for Meat reduction or avoidance of Meat that is willing to devote 10 years of his life for that. And, and it's probably me. Hmm.

0 (16m 5s):
All right. So you, I guess you reach out to a few companies, right, to propose this idea around three D printing Meat and you don't hear back, but this, I I mean this opportunity seems big, too big to ignore. So, so tell me more about your thinking during that time.

3 (16m 20s):
At that point of time, nobody was talking about stakes. It was considered sign fiction, moonshot, how can we make a steak out of plants? A burger makes sense. A sausage chicken nugget. But a steak is the most complicated food product that we eat and there is no food technology that exists that can reach to this level of complexity. And three d printing has a lot of disadvantages, a lot, a lot, a lot. But complexity is the number one benefit. There's no added cost for complexity.

0 (16m 50s):
So essentially, I mean, I mean every, anyone who's tried impossible Meat or beyond Meat, it's, it's not easy, but it's relatively easy to replicate ground Meat. You can You know it's been done for a while, but making a stake, actually trying to replicate a stake with the You know all of the, the, the different intramuscular layers, it's very hard to do. You're thinking, well, maybe given your background a three D printing, maybe there's a way to actually three d print a stake that actually replicates a stake to actually use plant-based materials to do this. But you, your experience in three D printing was with hard materials, right?

0 (17m 31s):
I mean three D printing with food materials is a totally different, different beast. I I imagine

3 (17m 38s):
It's totally different business also, I didn't have experience as a technologist. Yeah. I had an experience in conferences making presentation, right. And the first few months playing in my kitchen actually squeezing different protein stuff out of syringes to, to emulate three d printing. And I even bought a three D printer for, for quite a lot of money outta my pocket that I didn't know how to operate for six months was a very, very immature way of starting a business. But it was also fun and also was very honest because I thought that by this creation in the garage, I will come up with a revolution that will change the world. Yeah. But, but this isn naive beginning led to something serious that we, we didn't plan necessarily.

0 (18m 22s):
So this is 2018 and you are like literally with syringes, injecting just lines of what? Like, I don't know, different fats and like You know ba basically most most plant-based Meat is made from pea protein or, or wheat gluten proteins or You know it's got coconut fat and, and You know different vegetable. So was that, is that what you were doing? You were just squeezing these different components onto a, I don't know, a piece of parchment paper or something and just trying to let it dry and then do another layer? Like how, how were you doing it?

3 (18m 57s):
How did You know? How do You know all the secrets? So I had this intuition that that is true, that that Meat is comprised of muscle fat and blood. Yeah. And I try to, to develop the, the muscle fat and blood separately. So I took soy protein, I bought in a health store, soy protein and some, some pure gluten and some pea protein. And I tried to blend it with beru and I made the fat out of coconut fat and, and I took water and beru and some flavors like soy sauce. And I called it blood. And then manually, I, I injected layer by layer, even one of those creations i, I posted on a Facebook group of Meat lovers and I said, this is our, this is my rum steak. What do you think about my rum steak? It was inedible.

3 (19m 37s):
It, it was not something you can eat. But, but when I show this to people, I don't think they were excited about the technology or the level of sophistication, but I saw I, I have some crazy ability to, to follow a wild idea.

0 (19m 54s):
Alright, so you, you and Adam Lahav, who is your co-founder who you had met at hp, you, you decide to start this company. It's gonna take a lot of money and a lot of You know research to get this right. You, you knew something a lot about three D printing as a product manager. But you had to find, presumably you had to find some scientists to work with to help you start to get something, even some kind of prototype that is You know that you could serve to people. Where did you go? Did you start in Israel or did you, did you find a lab somewhere else?

3 (20m 35s):
We did something very Israeli. We didn't have money, so we hired young people that would help us learn something new that had an interesting background. So we hired a food engineer, a a three D printing guy, a maker and a chef. This was the team and it wasn't the team to crack the technology for the long term. Yeah. But it's the team to understand what are our gaps, what are we missing? And then this, this team is amazing. They're still in the company. We find, found two people. One is our VP of research and development and he's a physicist, so not related to food, but he actually knows how to take wild technological ideas and make them into reality.

3 (21m 15s):
And the second is our, is our C T O that has a background in tissue engineering. So he made Meat in the lab and then he went to three D printing. And all of these people, they really, really care about the planet. So they all eat Meat, they all actually love Meat, but they care about the planet and care about doing something that has an impact far beyond just technology and a business. And when we told them the story, they quit really, really great jobs and joined us that that's amazing. That's something that can happen in Israel, especially when you combine technology and sustainability.

0 (21m 49s):
So how did you make the first You know products that you could actually test on people? I mean where like, given that you had utterly failed in 2018, not utterly, but what you made in your home was inedible. Where, how did you start to to to get it to a place where you could actually make something that was edible?

3 (22m 10s):
The first thing we needed a lab, I have a friend that worked with me in HP that his family operates labs that you can rent. And they gave us a lab for almost free and, and we set up shop there. And then we started just sourcing, buying every protein, every flavor compound every fat that we can and building a three D printer that can manipulate these products. So we, we built our own printer. We build a machine from scratch and we tried to build different structures and see how the different structure impacts your experience, the flavor. So how this element of three d printing can manipulate something in food. We didn't try to make a steak, we didn't try to make something tasty, wanted to see what kind of things we can create with three D printing that the normal food company cannot develop.

3 (22m 57s):
And the first thing that we developed were not tasty and they were not meaty, but they showed anybody from food science that this is something new. This is a new property of food that we can create by this combination of three D printing and the different components that we had. And, and then we accelerated things because at that point of time it was very clear that this can become a stake one day it was very exciting and we thought that that's it, that's our job is done. We filed a patent for that and we thought that's easy now only thing we need to do like six more months in the lab and then we will sell a three D printer to every restaurant around the world.

0 (23m 37s):
The idea was you would basically, the, the business was gonna be the printers, not the Meat. You would sell the printers to restaurants and then they could print Meat, print their own plant-based Meat on on demand.

3 (23m 48s):
On demand. No waste. Just in time. Yeah. Personalize your steak. We even, we had the habit of demoing people a steak that they would cut and their name will be inside. They couldn't eat it because it wasn't tasty, but it was very impressive that we can control the shape of the steak from the outside and from the inside.

0 (24m 5s):
So I know that you guys raised your about $6 million in seed funding in 2019 and that probably You know got you to a place where you could develop something that was You know, maybe ready to test on, on people on Meat eaters. And you launched in the middle of Covid in July of 2020, I think your first product, the alt stake came out. And just, just sort of explain this to me. Essentially what you were trying to do was through different layers, right? Different micro layers of, of printing this stake. The result would be something that kind of pretty much replicated or got as close as possible to a real piece of Meat with the You know that that intramuscular, that muscular kind of You know the, the, the grain of the Meat and when you cut into it, there's that chewiness, you essentially got as far as you could tell as close to that as anybody had gotten.

3 (25m 3s):
Yeah. So at some point of time the cron we actually raised on the blood, just the fact that our blood component was very, very tasty and very impressive

0 (25m 10s):
And the blood was basically water and, and soy sauce and different flavors. Yeah,

3 (25m 15s):
It was a little bit more advanced than that. We found a collaboration with a flavor company that is called Voda, an amazing strategic partner. And we were able to, to develop this gush of blood that when you put in your mouth tastes like what comes outta steak, we were able to show the steak and explain. Once we combine those together, you'll have this experience of biting through fibers and having juiciness created. That was the seed round. And then when, when we, in Covid when before we launched, we did this large scale tasting. So we gave one about 1000 people in two days blind tasting of some products. Some were min Meat or some were not using additive manufacturing, but it was the first time we gave people a steak. And it was very, very encouraging to see consumer reaction kids.

3 (26m 2s):
I remember there's a nice video of a mother giving her kid a bite of her product. And then I told her You know it's made from plant, from the steak actually the steak. And she told me, don't tell him what is an actual steak. He doesn't know what he's eating. Hmm. And of course, investors saw that it's not only a technological promise of of patents and a mush, it's something that people are now starting to eat and get excited about. And then we, we raised more money and also started working more more with chefs. Once we were more confident, we started going to this mission star chefs and butchers.

0 (26m 34s):
I wanna ask you about that in a sec. But you basically, it sounds like you abandoned this plan to sell three D printers. That, that, that original concept you kind of pivoted and said, no, let's just focus on making the Meat and selling the Meat.

3 (26m 45s):
Yeah, it was a big pivot, but it happened in one minute that basically created a new, more like a business aspiration to the company. We were speaking with one of the largest beef companies in the world with the management team, and we had a presentation about our technology and what we were doing and they asked me, so how can we collaborate? And I told 'em, You know, actually we don't want to collaborate with you, we want to be you. And they said, what do you mean? We told 'em, yeah, we want to be the world's largest Meat company. And they stopped and they applauded. They say, okay, that's the way of thinking. And when we came out to this meeting, we started saying to everybody, we're going to become the world's biggest Meat company. This is, this is what we're going to do. And if you're the world's biggest Meat company, you're not selling the technology, you're selling Meat.

0 (27m 29s):
We're gonna take another short break. But when we come back more from Eshchar on his goal to make Redefine Meat the largest Meat company in the world, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This lab. Welcome back to How I Built This lab. I'm Guy Raz. My guest today is Eshchar Ben Shiri, who realized the best way to grow his plant-based Meat company is to work with people who know a lot about food. A as you started to get more attention, you eventually developed a partnership with two really famous chefs, both Michelin starred chefs, Marco Pierre White and and Ron Blo.

0 (28m 18s):
Marco Pierre White from Britain. Very, very famous chef. And I saw him do, do a video saying that the first time he tried it, he was kind of blown away.

5 (28m 28s):
Well the first thing I wanted to understand was the construction of it. And so I snapped it and I tasted it and it reminded me of brave cheek of beef. And I thought this is genius. And I did say it's the most clever thing I've ever seen in my 45 years of being in a kitchen.

0 (28m 49s):
And, and I should add, I've tried it, it's actually amazing. It, it, it tastes and, and feels like a short rib. These guys You know, get a lot of a, I mean there's a lot of plant-based Meat products out there and there's a lot of competition. It's a very competitive space. And even the idea of getting shelf space in the supermarket just seems daunting. How did you convince them to try this? I mean, someone like Marco Pier White has, he gets, gets pitched every day from a plant-based company. So how did you, how did you get to him a a small You know company based in, in outside of Tel Aviv going to him and saying, Hey, try this. How how'd you do that?

3 (29m 29s):
I think They weren are two reasons. One is humility. So in, in plant-based Meat, there's a lot of companies, including some of our friends that say we have a perfect replacement for Meat. You have the same texture, the same flavor, the same everything that you expect from Meat. And then you take a bite and you see what is the distance. Yeah. So we say, and it's not, Meat is incredible. Meat is so amazing. It's been developed through You know millions of years of evolution. So assuming that we are already there, we're not there. The second, the passion to really listen. So when we came to Marco Pure White, when we came to Ron Lau, by the way, very early on in the process, we told him, take a bite, tell us what's wrong in this product. Don't tell us how amazing it is. Let's start selling it in in all of your restaurants.

3 (30m 10s):
Just be a partner on making this really great. And we did it with them, but we also went to butchers. We also went to the people that know intimately this connection between Meat and the consumer. And we told them, just tell us the honest truth. Not only Mar by the way, Marco is incredible. He's also poetic and, and he has this philosophy around the world. Ron is brilliant in combining flavor, but every cook in every catering that we work with has a lot of criticism on our product. And we listen. Yeah. We don't say, no, no, you are mistaken. We say, okay, maybe in the next version we actually need to add some more bite and some more fat and to make the flavors more natural.

0 (30m 45s):
But you're essentially constantly trying to, to to, to change it and shape it. You're not, you're not saying this is the final product that we sell Now what, what, because what, what what I tried, what was available. This, this kind of short rib really had that chewiness and that bite and, and it was like 95% there. You know, it was really close. And I'd never tasted anything that that was like that, that was plant-based product. So, but you're, you're basically saying we're not You know, we're we might be 50% the way there already right now.

3 (31m 19s):
Yeah. And also Meat is so diverse and even beef, think about beef, you eat not only short rib and maybe you don't like short rib or you happen to like short rib, but what about the tender and the rebuy? What about a very fatty marbled ribeye? What about a very lean cut of skirt steak that is very bloody? So Meat is not a single product. Beef is not a product. Beef is a world of different cultures. Yeah, different supply chains and, and they are all complicated and they're all tasty and all have different consumers that want them. By the way, You know what's the problem with the dish that you ate? The product was meant to be a steak. We wanted people to serve it as a steak and to take it into short rib, but it, it performs really well there.

3 (32m 0s):
So the next version of that was how we are not only doing this ness chewiness of short rib, but how can the product stands alone on the plate. Yeah.

0 (32m 11s):
I mean, knowing what You know about, about this technology, right? How, how, how long will it take do you think, before you can create a fully plant-based steak that is indistinguishable from a a, an animal steak?

3 (32m 26s):
The question is more what is the benchmark? So today, if we do a blind tasting into all of our products, we can choose a, an okay Meat including a steak that consumers will not tell the difference. Hmm. But the problem is that If, you go to a steakhouse, the steakhouse where we are served, we, we are in a place called Beef Bar in multiple countries around the world. And the beef bar serves Wagyu Meat. So the highest price Meat Yes.

0 (32m 49s):
Just super premium Meat. Yeah.

3 (32m 51s):
Yeah. So of course we cannot compete in a blind tasting. And we want, we believe that in three years from now, we can also provide a Wagyu beef with the same level of marbling, the same level of tenderness and, and richness of flavor. So that is our aim. Our aim is to constantly increase the benchmark of how do we compete. So Israeli beef, actually, okay, one is not the best in the world in many cases, especially high tech companies that we work with. The substitute Meat with redefined Meat, they say the Meat that we buy your Meat is already even better, of course much more healthy and much more sustainable. But when we go to France, for example, the, the beef there and the way people consume beef, even a burger in, in France iste, she not eating in a bun, eating with a knife and fork.

3 (33m 35s):
So it's more difficult to compete with our burger that is, is better than some of the burgers that are served in Israel in a Meat restaurant. So that, that is the real focus. The real focus is, is how do you find a benchmark that every time that our product improve addresses much more consumers. So Angu steak, which is let's say what a lot of people in America love, we're not there yet. Once we have an Angus steak in Angus Reba, which is a year from now, we can go to US mainstream stake houses.

0 (34m 4s):
At what point will, will these products be available in grocery stores?

3 (34m 7s):
Eventually, in order to become the world biggest Meat company, we need to be everywhere that Meat is found. But we think that the way to reach consumers and the way to improve our products is through restaurants. So as we improve our product and we improve our scale, we start to sell more and more to consumers directly in Israel. We're already there. So in Israel you can buy a range of our product in basically every store. And in Europe it'll take a little bit more time. First, we're still building the recognition of our quality and, and the value of what we're bringing in restaurants. And we have a lot more work to do. And, and we're building capacity because it's a new technology and we develop our own formulations and products and also machinery.

3 (34m 48s):
And it takes us time and it takes money. And we have a lot of demand for our products and not enough capacity. So we rather work with the Missionar restaurant and the caterers. Somewhere next year, a year from now, we'll start rolling out to more retailers in Europe with the products including our stakes, and then gradually grow until we reach also to the U s A and then follow the same path first restaurants, then retail.

0 (35m 13s):
And what about price point? I mean, right now I is it, is the price of a, of a redefined Meat steak comparable to a quality stake? Or is it, is it higher?

3 (35m 24s):
It's comparable to high quality stake and the quality is not there yet? So it's, it's a little bit a premium for the, the relative level of quality because the value that we bring is not just the price. So when people consume redefined Meat, they want to experience something that doesn't come from an animal that is more sustainable, that is more healthy, and they're willing to pay a small premium. Not huge, it's not double the price. It's about 20, 30% more expensive. And we have limited capacity, actually our cost of ingredients. So the, the cost of our input, unlike Meat, is very low because Meat cows consume about 25 kilogram of feed for every kilo kilogram of Meat.

3 (36m 6s):
And we actually use about 30% of ingredients to make a kilo of Meat and the rest is water. So on that regard, we're very efficient because we operate in a small scale. Everything related to automation, to packaging, to capital equipment is inefficient. As we grow with that, we'll become cheaper in our production and we can lower the, the price and we, we can easily become at small scale cheaper than Meat. And Meat today has massive scale, massive trillions of dollars of scale, and we're talking about tens of millions of dollars to reach a, a relatively decent scale and lower price point.

0 (36m 42s):
Let me ask you a, a business related question. I mean, you've raised a lot of money. This is a capital intensive product. I think you've raised if, if I'm right, close to $200 million now in, in several rounds of fundraising. But I have, have to imagine there's a, you've got a ways to go before you're gonna hit profitability. I mean maybe, maybe 10 years.

3 (37m 4s):
No. So we are very lucky. We invest a lot in technology and our technology is very, very complicated. But we chose a very simple set of ingredients that allowed us with a new technology to reach good scale and revenue quite fast. So we're actually selling and on the individual level product, we are profitable. The key is how much scale we need to be profitable as a company and how much we want to invest in future technology. And by being in the market and growing every month and investing in technology, we can increase the additional, the, the addressable market that we have. So it's not 10 years, it's two years from now.

0 (37m 44s):
So in, in You know, in sort of five years from now, where do you wanna be? Where, where do you imagine you'll be

3 (37m 53s):
In five years from now? We're already a big Meat company. We have a presence in Europe in basically every restaurant that you can imagine because food service is a market that we dominate and we are in all the nationwide retailers with our means range and our stake. And we have sizable business in the u s A from restaurants in, in retail. But the idea is If, you look even 10 years from now out of the 20 biggest Meat companies around the world, one company or two company for sure will not rely on animals. This I have no doubt. And we want to be the first one to reach there, to have a Meat business that is the distribution of Meat that is found everywhere, that consumers enjoy the product that are very healthy and very sustainable, like a Meat company without the animal that they slaughter.

3 (38m 40s):
And it's a very, very challenging task because the big Meat companies have been around for 100 years, but some point of time Meat companies will not rely on animals. And the question is, who's going to do it? Somebody has to do it. We don't have a choice. It's, it's inevitable in the sense that the plant needs it and animal need it and human need it. And I don't see a lot of companies that have this ambition because it's really tough. It's really, it's, it's a tough journey to do what we're doing. But, but the potentially is so amazing. The potentially is so unique, so incredible. It's something we, we would tell our grandkids about. Hmm. So this, this is what drives us and five years from now is just the beginning. So we started six years ago, five years from now is 11 years in for, for the world's biggest Meat company is just the beginning.

0 (39m 22s):
Eshchar, Ben, Shiri, thanks so much.

3 (39m 24s):
Thank you guy. I enjoyed a lot and thank you. It's, it's an honor.

0 (39m 27s):
That's Eshchar Ben treat co-founder and c e o of Redefine Meat. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click follow on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Kerry Thompson and edited by John Isabella with research help from Chris Maccini and Music by Rum. Team Arablouei, our production team at How. I Built This includes Neva Grant, Casey Herman, JC Howard, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, Carla Estevez, Ramel Wood, and Sam Paulson. Our audio engineer was Gilly Moon. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Lab.

Amazon Music (40m 10s):
Hey Prime members, you can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today

wondery Plus (40m 19s):
or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts.

0 (40m 23s):
If, you wanna show your support for our show? Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com.

Wondery (40m 31s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Talk Triggers (40m 38s):
I'm Manjit Minhas Host of the podcast, a wealth of women's stories, and we're carving out a space where women's voices are celebrated. If you're looking for insight and inspiration through powerful storytelling, then this is the podcast for you. Learn more at ig.ca/women.