wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How, I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts,

Peloton (11s):
When you find something you love, you stick with it. Like this podcast and like working out with Peloton and with up to $950 off Peloton purchases this holiday. Bring home a Peloton bike, bike plus, or tread and workout like nobody's watching. Unleash Yourself. Ride, run box or freak the hit out. It's your workout, your rules. I always find myself looking forward to my next ride with Peloton. For Pelotons best offers of the season now extended through December 5th, head to www do one peloton.ca/offers all access membership separate terms, apply

NPRs body Electric show (49s):
Did, you know you are physically adapting to all your swiping Scrolling and tapping We are changing our bodies and what they're able to do through our habits. NPRs Body Electric, a special interactive series investigating how to fix the relationship between our tech and our health. Listen in the TED Radio hour feed wherever you get your Podcasts.

0 (1m 15s):
Hello and welcome to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So this is the place where we tell the stories of companies that are working on big world changing ideas, and it's also where we bring back previous How I Built This guests for an update. Steve Ells was first on the show way back in 2017, and at the time he told the story of how he built Chipotle from a single restaurant in Denver to a massive chain that really changed the restaurant industry and kind of created this whole concept of fast casual dining. It's actually an amazing episode, and if you haven't heard it, I definitely recommend that you go back in your podcast feed and give it a listen.

0 (1m 56s):
But we invited Steve to come back on the show this week because he's now working on a new concept that he also believes could revolutionize the industry. Essentially, it's a chain of very small, highly automated restaurants that will serve a vegan menu. It's called Kernel, and he's planning to open the first locations in New York City very soon. And when we left off with Steve back in 2017, Chipotle was dealing with a pretty major crisis. A string of foodborne illness outbreaks had caused some customers to get sick, and things got so bad that Steve would actually end up stepping down from his role as CEO of the chain that he started back in 1993

5 (2m 40s):
When the foodborne illness issues were were going on. I mean, this was, this was some of our toughest, toughest times at Chipotle and, and coming off of extraordinary success and, and kind of nothing but success. It's, it's quite a shock. It's quite a slap in the face. And, and when people are, are getting ill from what you're feeding them, it's, you take that very personally. It's, yeah, it's, it's nothing you want to see happen. And so you You know you're only thinking about how to solve the problem, what caused the problem. How can we make sure it never happens again? How can we make sure that Chipotle will be You know the safest place for people to eat?

5 (3m 22s):
So that's, that's what's on your mind not thinking about my position. However, after we got through reinventing our safety protocols and making sure that we were putting the best practices in place, You know it, it was taking a while for sales to come back. Yeah. The public was wary and, and I can't blame them for so long. We had promised food with integrity and, and then something like this happened. So I knew You know. It was pretty obvious to me that we needed to jumpstart the company and, and, and new leadership is one of the things that, that needs to be part of that.

0 (4m 1s):
Yeah. Steve, the last time we talked, this was in the fall of 2017, and I guess at the time you were, you were already having conversations about your future as ACEO of Chipotle, and I think just, just like, just about a month after that interview aired in, in November of 2017, you stepped down as CEO and, and you became executive chairman. Was that, I mean, I mean everything I've read about your statements You know you were super supportive of, of Brian Nichol who took over and, and You know very kind of gracious, but I I just from a personal perspective, right, like from the Steve Ells as the guy who like saw Mission burritos in San Francisco and the steaming You know plates of beans to the guy who starts this restaurant in Denver and then scales it, how did it feel to stop running it?

5 (4m 53s):
That process is You know gut wrenching. Right? To have allowed under your watch a foodborne illness is, is is not easy. Yeah. Looking in the mirror and knowing that having new leadership to, to sort of restart the, the brand You know it's the right decision. These are not easy things to, to have to face You know all said and done after doing it for, at that time, it would've been 25 years. Having someone else come in to, to take the CEO position is, is a sense of relief. Really. Hmm. And so, yeah, I I'm, I'm not gonna say it was easy because it wasn't.

5 (5m 36s):
Yeah. And when, and when I handed it over to Brian You know, I felt comfort in his ability to rebuild the team, to build excitement about the safety protocols, the, the new procedures, and also his way of You know, speaking to the public and, and gaining confidence through Yeah. Great communications. And so, so he did a fantastic job. But You know, sitting on the board as executive chairman, it's not what I do. I mean, it was a fine job, but, but it's not what energizes me. Yeah. And, and so I took the opportunity to retire and think about what was next.

0 (6m 17s):
You stepped down officially, it was announced in right as the pandemic was unfolding in, in March of 2020 as executive chairman. And when you stepped down, did you have a sense of what you wanted to do next? Did you kind of have an idea in your mind of what, where you would go?

5 (6m 34s):
I didn't You know. I remember, well, I remember a few times these, these sort of big transitions in my life after college deciding to go to cooking school. I said, dad, I wanna go to cooking school. He said, well, are you gonna be a chef? I said, no, I just, I'm really interested in cooking. I, I think I, I think I'd have a lot of fun. I think I'd learn a lot. He said, ah, maybe that's risky, but may maybe decide what you wanna do first. I remember working at Stars and, and and, and telling my dad, Hey, I, I'm gonna leave. I'm gonna go start this, this burrito place. I'm gonna move back to Colorado and do it. He's like, well, tell me what the, what does the plan look like? I said, I don't really know yet.

5 (7m 15s):
I just, I just have this hunch. And, and so You know I'm not afraid to try new things without sort of having a full plan in place. The change just felt like it was going to be right. I I, I knew that I needed to do something different. I just didn't know what,

0 (7m 36s):
So what did you, I mean, during the pandemic, did you kind of hunker down and just start to think?

5 (7m 41s):
So it was in the winter, so I was in Colorado and I was skiing a lot, but also reading and spending time with friends and, and family and You know, one of the things I read was Bill Gates, how to avoid a climate disaster. And what struck me was this scientific consensus that if we don't address the amount of greenhouse gases were emitting and, and bring them down to zero by 2050, that we, we go over the tipping point and, and whether you believe You know those are exactly the numbers. I think conceptually it's right that we have You know we have a long way to go to, to, to reduce our greenhouse gases, So, that we're not affecting negatively our, our planet.

5 (8m 27s):
And I thought, well, what, what could I do about it? And I, I come to understand that You know 25 or 30% or so of the greenhouse gases that we emit come from what we eat. And, and the vast majority of that comes from animal sources. So I thought, well, what if, what if I started a, a plant-based restaurant? Might that help? And of course, if I start a plant-based restaurant, that's really not gonna move the needle. But I thought, well, what if it's a chain the size of Chipotle? Might that help? And still probably not. These are, these are big You know big problems that we have. And, and so I thought, well, what if everybody copied this restaurant?

5 (9m 10s):
Like they, they copied the Chipotle model, might that do something? Hmm. And and I thought, well, quite possibly. And so why not give it a shot?

0 (9m 19s):
When you were sort of experimenting with this, I'm assuming that that You know when you left Chipotle, you couldn't open another chain of Mexican restaurants, but it was, it would be, it was okay for you to, to get in back into the food business?

5 (9m 33s):
Oh yeah, no, I, I, I was, I was speaking with Chipotle, of course I have a non-compete in, in, in place. But I asked them, I said, well, what, what do you think if I, if I started a plant-based restaurant, have nothing to do with Chipotle or the fast casual format, certainly something completely different. And, and they said it would be fine to open a, a handful of, of restaurants.

0 (9m 57s):
And, and so you thought, okay, a plant-based restaurant, there had been some attempts to do this. I think e even in, in, in Washington DC Jose Andres has a, like a plant-based, fast casual place. When you start to think about it, what were you thinking? Like, like this will be like plant-based fast food kind of restaurant.

5 (10m 20s):
So I don't really like categories. I never really liked the categories that people threw at Chipotle, but I wanted to create a menu that, that people felt good about eating every day. So the name of this, the, the name of this restaurant is, is Kernel. And we have two sandwiches. Yeah. One's sort of like a, a, an engineered patty that that's meant to taste like chicken. It's like, it's a fried chicken sandwich that's not chicken, but tastes every bit as much of like a fried chicken sandwich. And then that we have the Kernel burger, which is grains and legumes, but we also have two big salads. We have a a, a kale caesar that's of course plant-based.

5 (11m 1s):
And we have a salad of chickies with white bean and chickpea smear and lentils and a mustard vinegarette. We have some, some sides that are not typical for, for fast food, of course we have crispy potatoes, but we also have roasted carrots. And the carrots have a, a green hummus and spicy toasted almonds. We have roasted beets with quinoa and a salsa verde and a seed crunch. So we make, we take a bunch of different seeds and make like a savory granola. And, and lastly for the vegetables, we have a crispy cucumbers with chili jam and roasted cashews. So when some people think about these plant-based menus, they think about these, these highly processed items that are meant to taste like meat.

5 (11m 49s):
And yes, we have one chicken sandwich that's meant to taste like chicken, but, but most of the menu is You know whole sort of grains, legumes, vegetables.

0 (12m 1s):
And, and so my, this is my, my big question is about, obviously you are inspired to do this because you wanna do something that has a net positive benefit or impact on the planet. But why do you think that this kind of food will work? I'm a huge fan of this food. I love vegan food and I mostly eat a vegan diet. But I wonder, I mean, You know. I I, here in California, the line to Inn Out Burger from 11:00 AM to 2:00 AM is always long. There's always people there, You know, and, and five guys, burger joints, taco places, Chipotle You know, probably the vast majority of people eat at Chipotle are still ordering the the meat proteins.

0 (12m 45s):
Why do you think that a, a vegan concept like this is gonna appeal in in scale?

5 (12m 53s):
So Guy, I'm, I'm not, I don't adhere to a plant-based diet. I still eat meat. I still eat fish. But I've noticed over the years, I eat less and less meat. And when I find really great plant-based options, I find myself drawn to them. And I notice a lot of people are acting in a similar way. I, and I think people choose more plant-based options for a number of reasons. Some people understand that there's an environmental implication. Some people care about animal welfare issues. Other, other people think that plant-based menus offer You know a better health.

5 (13m 37s):
And, and for me it's probably all of those things personally. And I think, and I think I'm not alone. I think people will eat more plant-based diets and, and, and make that part of their life if there are better options. And if we, and if we offer something that's really compelling, that's really delicious, that's, that's something that you want to eat often. I think this could be a, a wildly successful business.

0 (14m 1s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back, how Steve Ells is using robots to rethink the entire restaurant experience. That's in just a moment. Stay with us. You're listening to How I, Built This lab.

Lumi (14m 20s):
There hasn't really been a whole lot of innovation in the deodorant space that is until now, Lummi is a full body pH balanced, aluminum free deodorant created by an ob GYN to keep you smelling fresh, literally for days up to 72 hours. In fact, Lummis Starter Pack is perfect for new customers. It comes with a solid stick deodorant, cream tube deodorant to free products of your choice, like mini body wash or deodorant wipes and free shipping. Lumi is also excited to announce the launch of their men's line, Mando with more masculine sense and packaging, but still outrageously effective. I actually have a stick of Mando Pro Sport deodorant right here, here it is in the studio with me. It's really awesome and incredibly effective and is a special offer for our listeners, new customers get $5 off a Lumi or Mando Starter Pack with code built@lumideodorant.com or shop mando.com. That equates to over 40% off your starter pack when you visit lumi deodorant.com or shop mando.com and use Code Built.

A Wealth of women's stories (15m 29s):
I'm Manjit Minhas, host of the podcast, A Wealth of women's stories, and we're carving out a space where women's voices are celebrated. If you're looking for insight and inspiration through powerful storytelling, then this is the podcast for you. Learn more at ig.ca/women.

8 (15m 45s):
Hi guy, my name is Grace and I'm from Reston, Virginia. I have too many favorite episodes. I can't possibly pick just one, but I will never forget where I was when I heard Jamie Siminoff from Ring Talk about the crisis that almost crushed his company and then how his wife responded. I learned how moments of grace and the darkest of times can make all the difference in the world. So thank you.

0 (16m 9s):
If you wanna share your favorite episode of How I, Built This record a short voice memo on your phone telling us your name, where you're from, what your favorite episode is, and why a lot like the voice memo you just heard. And email it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. And thanks so much. We love you guys. You are the best. And now back to the show. Welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz and I'm talking with Steve Ells, the founder of Chipotle, and now a new restaurant concept called Kernel.

0 (16m 53s):
Okay. So you come up with this, this plant-based menu, and, and that's, that's one way that kernel's gonna be different from like a typical fast food or, or casual restaurant, but I, I understand that you're also planning to operate these locations, these Kernel locations in a a different way. Can you tell me a little bit about that? Like how is Kernel gonna be run differently than a typical restaurant?

5 (17m 16s):
So the, the, the main difference is that it's a, it's based on a hub and spoke model. So one of the most difficult parts of making a great meal is the prep. And what we've decided to do at Kernel is centralize the prep. So we do all of our preparation, all of the food prep in a central kitchen, and that will service a couple of handfuls of restaurants within a five to 10 minute bicycle ride. And we'll put this prepped food into totes and load the totes onto a wagon and pull them by bicycle to the restaurants every hour.

5 (17m 59s):
So when the restaurant receives their tote, they load the prep food into the, into the system. When you guy want to order food at Kernel, you take out your device and you go through our app or our web app and see the offerings and decide what you want and do the little double click and pay and agree upon a time to, to pick it up or have it delivered. And the system takes it from there. The system knows what time it needs to start cooking the food, what time it needs to start toasting the buns, and, and then hands that to the second person who puts that all together for you.

5 (18m 43s):
And then hands that off to a person who bundles and, and puts the the items in a bag and places them in a cubby. And so where a typical fast casual restaurant might have You know a dozen folks at peak period, Colonel would have three. When you come into the restaurant, you unlock your cubby with your SMS and, and off you go.

0 (19m 11s):
So, so this concept, I guess is to completely reinvent our relationship with restaurants essentially, that it is going to be delivered exactly on time and it's going to be hot because we're picking it up. It's ready exactly when we pick it up. And much of it will be automated. Each of these Kernel locations won't, will only need three humans to operate them.

5 (19m 38s):
E, e, e. Exactly. So, so we've taken a lot of the, of what I'll call the, the, the waste out of the experience. And so if you think about all of the energy that's expended in a typical restaurant and you just sort, you sort of study all the extra steps and the power and the space. It, it's, it's extraordinary So for instance, customers will not walk into the restaurant, look at a menu board, talk to somebody behind a counter, place their order, hand them a credit card or cash and have APOS transaction because there is no menu board, there is no counter, there is no person behind the counter, there is no POS.

5 (20m 26s):
All of that takes place on your device before you even go into the restaurant. And you go into the restaurant only when your order is ready and you'll know precisely when your order is ready. Your app will tell you, we also operate out of a much smaller footprint. We can operate out of 800 square feet, where a typical fast casual might be 2,500 square feet and our build out cost is a lot less. A, a typical fast casual restaurant will have a grease hood, fire suppression systems, gas lines, grease traps, You know all of these sort of infrastructure pieces.

5 (21m 8s):
We don't need any of that.

0 (21m 10s):
So my question I'm, I'm still wondering about is why do you need the hub and spoke model? Like why can't you just make all of the food like You know like McDonald's does, for example, in one central location and send everything frozen to each location and just keep it in a freezer.

5 (21m 27s):
What is special about the Chipotle model or the the fast casual model is that a lot of the food prep is done at the individual restaurants. Yeah. And so before that, in typical fast food restaurants, You know the food would come in highly processed or frozen. The new fast casual model has allowed fresh ingredients to come into restaurants and are prepared on site. Well, we're doing the same thing except in a central kitchen that's only a few minutes away from the restaurants. And what's exciting about this model is that you can really focus on the central kitchen doing prep all day long.

5 (22m 8s):
If you look at the, at most fast casual restaurants, prep will be be done before lunch and then you stop and you switch over to lunch rush. And then after lunch you go back to prep and then you go back to cooking again for the dinner rush with the Kernel model prep is done all day long. So you're constantly producing freshly prepared vegetables, patties, buns, everything that the, that the restaurant needs. And you're delivering them frequently. We, we'll, we'll open with a, with a cadence of about a delivery every hour.

0 (22m 44s):
Alright. So you mentioned that it's gonna take just three people working in each of these restaurants at a time and a lot of automation. So let me, I, let me see if I understand this. 'cause I think that what're talking about is robotics, right? And I've, I've read a little bit about it and I guess there's gonna be like a robotic arm and a, an Electric oven that's automated that actually does a lot of the cooking. So w was, was that equipment that you were like, could, did you just find it off the shelf or, or was that equipment that you had to, that had to be custom made?

5 (23m 16s):
So what what I, what I knew I wanted to do was have a, a team that was smaller than the typical restaurant team. And so how do you reduce the number of people from let's say a dozen down to three? Well, there's a, there's a lot of automation. There is robotics, You know, You know you order from a digital environment, right? Instead of a a a person to person environment. The equipment varies. So the, the robot arm, we didn't develop that. We, we bought an off the shelf cuckoo robot. It's a, it's a robot that's typically used on assembly lines. They, they work 24 7 for years. They're very reliable.

5 (23m 57s):
Of course, we custom program that we use an impingement oven that we took and, and modified, we have special pans that we custom made that go into the oven and a special way that the, the robot arm engages with those pans. But a lot of the equipment is, is off the shelf. It's just used in a novel way. So if you look at the equipment, you might recognize some things, but some things for sure are custom.

0 (24m 31s):
Hmm. And tell me about, I mean, 'cause this model I if, if this works and I, I mean, I don't see why it wouldn't, I mean, I think you're, you're gonna open up the first location in the fall of 2023 and, and I read that plans are to have like 15 locations within the next two years. So imagine that, I mean the ambitions are, are, are big here.

5 (24m 54s):
Well, well, yes. I mean I, we, we will, we will go fast. You know the operating platform has been working now for well over a year and we're, we're now in the process of building the, the, the final version of it. And, and I expect that it will, we will open up and it'll be highly reliable. I I think that we will learn though, as we observe it in the first few months and, and You know almost for sure we will tweak it before the second restaurant opens. Yeah. And so I see over the next couple of years, as we build out 15 restaurants, we will continue to refine the system and I think we will be able to operate out of a smaller footprint and increase the number of items that, that we can make in a given time.

5 (25m 49s):
But for sure the, the first, the first restaurant, the, the platform works, it works well. And it's just very exciting to watch.

0 (25m 58s):
I mean, the idea of opening a restaurant with no grease hoods or grease traps, no ventilation, no deep fryers. That's very appealing because that is a, a huge challenge for many people who wanna open restaurants. I mean that that that the, the, the barriers to entry are high when you can't bring all those things in, they're expensive. So let's, let me, I mean, I'm curious, I mean, do you see this model, right? Do you see it being replicated by other, like the Chipotle model was replicated? Do, do you see that as part of your business? Like maybe even licensing the technology?

5 (26m 36s):
Well, I think, I think that's exactly it guy. When people come in to look at the system, I think they will notice that there are fewer people working in the restaurant. They'll notice the efficiencies, they'll notice the reduced square footage, they'll notice that it probably is a much lower investment than a, than a typical restaurant. And so people will be interested in copying or borrowing that, that model. I think an opportunity though, it would be to license this platform or parts of the platform to others for cheaper than they could build it themselves.

0 (27m 14s):
You know, it's, it is interesting. I, I wonder in terms of the cost, the startup costs, I'm, I'm, I'm curious about it. Like the other day I was a, I was at a Williams Sonoma and I was, I was eyeing this beautiful espresso machine and it was like $4,000. I'm not gonna buy it, but I was like, how many cups of of this coffee do I have to buy to for this to pay off? And actually you can do the math and you can figure it out and say, You know in a couple of years not gonna Starbucks. This thing's gonna pay itself off. So just applying that principle to this restaurant, our, I mean if you had a restaurant with a grease You know trap and the hood and all that stuff, and you had like five or six employees, you could get that up and running. But to have this restaurant with the special oven and the technology and only three employees is, are the startup costs just the initial costs higher to get it off the ground or, or not?

5 (28m 5s):
Well, You know, I have spent a good amount of money and I just completed my series A around and, and raised 36 million and yeah, so, so You know that'll take us through the next couple of years. And, and that will be a lot to open up 15 restaurants. The investment cost in these individual restaurants though is much less than a typical fast casual restaurant. Wow. So, so there, there is a lot that has gone into developing the technology, but the actual amount that you spend to open one of these units is substantially less than a typical fast casual restaurant.

0 (28m 45s):
So you could apply the same model to any kind of food essentially. Well,

5 (28m 50s):
I, I wouldn't say, I wouldn't say any kind of food. I I I couldn't see our system making spaghetti bologna today.

0 (28m 58s):
Right. Like but like grab and go food. I mean, for example,

5 (29m 0s):
Well there there are some things that I think it could do very well. There are others that it probably can't do yet. Yeah. But for sure, there's no question that robotics will have a lot more dexterity and they will be a lot easier to program. And through AI they will learn and get better. And so what we've done is we've developed a platform and a format that will allow us to avail ourselves of the new technology and sort of plug it into to what we've already created. And, and I think a legacy restaurant might have a harder time doing that or, or might not gain as much advantage of the new technology coming out.

5 (29m 43s):
Yeah. And so I think it's exciting for, for, for people to come in and be involved in something that, that has this kind of technology.

0 (29m 52s):
We're gonna take another quick break, but just ahead more from Steve Ells on the future of food service. Stay with us. You're listening to How I Built This lab.

Enbridge (30m 9s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it tomorrow. Sounds like hydrogen being added to natural gas to make it more sustainable. It sounds like solar panels generating thousands of megawatts and it sounds like carbon being captured and stored, keeping it out of our atmosphere. We've been bridging to a sustainable energy future for more than 20 years because what we do today helps ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge. Life takes energy

Wondery (30m 39s):
Deep in the enchanted forest from the whimsical world of Disney. Frozen something is wrong, Erindale is in danger once again from dark forces threatening to disrupt the peace and tranquility. And it's up to Anna and Elsa to stop the villains before it's too late. For the last 10 years, frozen has mesmerized millions around the world. Now Wondery presents Disney Frozen Forces of Nature podcast, which extends the storytelling of the beloved animated series as an audio first original story complete with new characters and a standalone adventure set. After the events of Frozen two, reunite with the whole crew, Anna, Elsa, Olaf, and Christophe for an action packed adventure of fun, imagination and mystery. Follow along as the gang enlist the help of old friends and new as they venture deep into the forest. And discover the mysterious copper machines behind the chaos and count yourself amongst the allies as they investigate the strange happenings in the enchanted forest. The only question is, are Anna and Elsa able to save their peaceful kingdom? Listen early and add free to the entire season of Disney Frozen Forces of Nature Podcast, along with exclusive bonus content on Wondery Plus join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or Wondery plus kits on Apple Podcasts.

4 (32m 10s):
Welcome

0 (32m 11s):
Back to How I Built This Lab. My guest is Steve Ells, the founder of Chipotle, and now a new highly automated vegan restaurant called Kernel. So one of the things, You know, there've been a few articles about what you're doing, but not much information yet. 'cause it's still, it was still You know, I guess in sort of stealth mode. But one of the things that that I've read that's, that I think is very interesting is you suggested that the current system, the current model of the sort of the fast food or fast casual even the restaurant industry is broken. And I and, and if you think that that this is the case, I think you're right, right? It's, it's, you can see this with restaurants are struggling to find employees, employees are struggling.

0 (32m 52s):
Many people don't wanna work in in the space. The the the pay is low and, or or can be low. And some restaurants have to You know, like in San Francisco pay a lot because the cost of living is so high. Is this in a sense also an attempt to kind of address that sort of broken labor system within restaurants?

5 (33m 14s):
Well, so, so I wanted to be able to have an experience for the team that is better than the typical fast food experience. One of the problems is that we see extraordinarily high turnover in the industry. I think it's something like 165% is, is typical. And so the folks are, are never there long enough to get really good at their jobs. And and I think the manager who has probably a team of 40 people if they have lunch and dinner shifts of a dozen, I mean this is, this is hard for someone to manage a team of 40 people.

5 (33m 57s):
Yeah. And so I'm excited about having these very, very small teams. So if we need three people at a shift, maybe we have a team of eight, maybe nine, and and you can really pay attention and mentor and train. And it's also different work. I mean, yes, they're cooking, yes it's a restaurant, but there's a lot of technology and understanding that technology and caring for that technology, maintaining the technology, it's a sort of an elevated position. It's gonna take a lot of training and we'll command a higher wages and, and since we only have three people, we'll be able to afford those higher wages.

5 (34m 37s):
Plus I think our purpose is bigger than our product. Being able to address global warming, being able to address some of the inequality with, with pay for folks in, in, in the world of fast food and restaurants in general, to be able to pay them much higher wages and give them full benefits, give them vacation time, give them predictable schedules, give them stock option programs, So that they can participate in the upside of the venture. This is all very, very exciting and it's much more doable when you have smaller teams that you can really mentor and pay a lot of attention to.

0 (35m 17s):
I'm curious, Steve, I'm I'm sure you've seen this at San Francisco airport. I'm sure a lot of people who've been to the airport have seen it, but there's a, a fully automated barista there. Right. And I think there's another one in the city. In fact, I, I saw a fully automated cotton candy machine recently, which was absolutely amazing. 'cause it shapes the cotton candy at different shapes. It's incredible. It seems like just a few more steps, this can be entirely automated that you wouldn't need any humans involved.

5 (35m 48s):
Well, I, I I think that that it's certainly possible in, in the future, but I think we're many, many, many, many years away from that how technology evolves with robotics and eventually how much dexterity these, these robots can have. You know, I'm not sure, but I think there's, there will always be a place You know for, for our teams to operate the, the Kernel model for the foreseeable future. And I'm talking about the next decade at least, right? Yeah. And so I I just wanna make sure that, that we're creating a system that has the potential to create a really great work environment and reward our folks appropriately.

5 (36m 39s):
And I think that's tough with some of the current fast food models out there. I think you see depressed wages because margins are so tight, right? It's, it's, yeah. And I, and I think these operators would love to pay their, their folks more, but the model just can't afford to do it.

0 (36m 56s):
Over the last 20 years, we've become more and more used to fewer and fewer human to human interactions, right? Like we order stuff through Amazon or we get our food delivered through DoorDash and You know, it just kind of happens. And for many people that's, that's better. It's a better option. But there are still lots of people who do like that face-to-face face interaction. You go into a Chick-fil-A and they're famously extremely friendly. Same with Inn Out. It's part of their training. The you will not encounter human at Kernel, right? You, you will go in and there will be no sort of human face. And, and so is there, how do you create a, a sense of warmth, a feeling of hospitality, welcome You know without the human, what, what are you doing to kind of, I don't know, bring that sensibility in?

5 (37m 47s):
Hmm. So a a lot of people ask, ask me this question and, and ask me if it's ultimately a good thing. You know. We'll, we'll have to see how it unfolds.

0 (37m 58s):
Yeah,

5 (37m 59s):
I know for sure that continuing to operate these systems that's heavy, heavy, heavy on numbers of employees who turn over very frequently is not sustainable. It says to me that people don't want those particular jobs under those conditions with, with that pay. And so it takes reinventing the system to do that. I I think craving human interaction is not going to go away. I think we might get it it in different places, but I see a necessity to create an economic model for serving this food and that and that, and that solves some problems.

5 (38m 52s):
There's always going to be a place, I think for the kind of human AC interaction that you, that that you describe, it will probably just be different.

0 (39m 3s):
So when will You know? Like what, when will You know you? You're, you're talking about 15 restaurants over the next two years. What are your, I mean obviously your metrics are gonna be your sales, but what other metrics, metrics are you gonna be looking for to see whether this is working?

5 (39m 18s):
Well, we, we will know a lot about our customers and their habits and, and their frequency and hopefully how they felt about their experience because of our connectivity to them through the app. You know success to me means that, that they love the food, that they tell all their friends about it, that they come often. And if that happens, we know we're in a very good position. Success also means that You know enough people are coming and we have the volumes to, to achieve the sales levels that we're predicting. And so I think if we have those two things, we're, we're off to the races.

0 (39m 54s):
So Right now you're starting in New York, which is where you live, and, and do you have a plan to of where you wanted to expand next? Or will you wait and see what happens in New York first?

5 (40m 6s):
So You know, I really like to focus on, on the problem at hand. And that is over the next two years, really refine the system. I think if we have the sales volume and the customer affinity to prove that the the brand is a success, then we go to new markets. And yes, there are, there are markets that have the right kinds of densities and they're close enough to us and there, there there'll be a natural expansion program.

0 (40m 33s):
Steve, what have you, how have you changed as a leader from the time you ran Chipotle to, to this, I mean, what are you doing differently, maybe better, that you didn't do there or that you learned from there that you're applying to here?

5 (40m 51s):
So Chipotle is 30 years old, was 30 years old this summer. And so if I think about my leadership style 30 years ago and what it is today, I mean, it's, it's, it's much, much different. You know, thankfully I've, I've learned from my mistakes, learned from other people who are terrific leaders. And I think I'm, I think the way I'm opening Colonels today is much different than I, than I opened Chipotle 30 years ago. There are some similarities though. I have a very strong vision for sort of the foundational principles and those will be really great ingredients, solid cooking techniques and, and building teams that believe in our purpose and, and love to provide great hospitality.

5 (41m 47s):
And while hospitality may not be face-to-face with the customers, it's providing a really good experience through the app. It's providing reliability on service times. It's making sure that everything that we serve is delicious. And so foundationally, I think I'll operate in a very similar way, but the team that I'm putting in place today is really a team that's so expert and ready to take this to the next level. And, and, and I didn't initially build Chipotle with that kind of team.

0 (42m 26s):
Yeah. You know Steve, you, your, your legacy as a, as a sort of a pioneer in this space is, is solidified. I mean, so many people have replicated the model of Chipotle and it's a great restaurant. I I probably You know my family probably eats there a few times a month. It's my, my kids' favorite place to eat. But You know, I, I wonder, I mean, you left Chipotle great reputation, You know wealthy, you did very well. Why are you doing this? I'm curious what motivates you now? You don't need the money, you don't need the reputational push. You don't need the legacy side. What, what is it that gets you going about doing this?

0 (43m 8s):
Why?

5 (43m 10s):
Well, it's, it's not an easy question to answer You know, I've been around restaurants my, my entire life and I see why there is high turnover. I see You know why certain restaurants serve certain kinds of food. I think Kernel could be a platform that perhaps solves some fundamental problems and it's a, it's really hard. But this, but this problem is, is fun to solve. And the team that I've put together, they're so smart and it's been really great to, to see how they have been addressing some of these challenges that, that we have.

5 (43m 50s):
I mean, I just, I have fun doing this, but I also have always loved serving people, like literally serving food. I mean, I used to love to throw dinner parties, You know in high school and college. And of course then when I graduate to college, I go into the restaurant business to serve food. So this idea of serving is, is sort of part of who I am. I think Kernel is just an extension of that, but just in a different way. I also, I also like to challenge the system. I don't think there's been a lot of innovation in restaurants OO over, over the generations. We pretty much have the same kind of equipment, the same kinds of kitchens, the same kinds of cooking techniques.

5 (44m 33s):
So I think, I think by reinventing it, I don't know, it's exciting and I think a lot of good could come out of it.

0 (44m 41s):
That's Steve s founder of Chipotle and now Colonel by the way, I wasn't kidding when I said that Chipotle is my kid's favorite place to eat. We were actually in Paris earlier this year on vacation. We're the greatest food cities on the planet and You know where they ate. That's right. They got burritos at Chipotle in Paris. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast apps so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Chris Maccini, with editing by John Isabella. Our music was composed by Rum Arablouei. Our audio engineer was Neal Rauch.

0 (45m 22s):
Our production team at How I Built This includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Carla Estevez, JC Howard, Carrie Thompson, Neva Grant, Malia Aga, and Sam Paulson. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Wondery (45m 41s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Enbridge (46m 0s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it. And it sounds like a renewable natural gas bus replacing conventional fleets. We are bridging to a sustainable energy future. Working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge life takes energy.