0 (0s):
Time is our most precious resource at Athena. Their mission is to power a possibility in support of ambitious people through the power of delegation. Athena believes that delegation is the superpower of all highly successful people. And working with an Athena executive assistant will realize that superpower their elite executive assistance will build a one-on-one long-term partnership to help achieve all of your personal and professional goals. Athena EA are best in class, receiving ongoing training and support so they evolve with your needs. Delegation will transform your life and you'll have more time For what matters most to you, invest in the corporation of you.

0 (46s):
Join the wait list@athenago.com. That's Athena go.com.

1 (52s):
Officially, one hour until your favorite show premieres. Time to get some snacks delivered through Instacart. Okay, let's get some popcorn Seltzer chocolate covered almonds. And wait. Did they release the whole season? Better Cart some ice cream for the two part finale. When your day should be ending, but a new season is starting, the world is your cart. Visit instacart.com or download the app and get free delivery on your first order. Offer valid for a limited time minimum order $10. Additional terms apply.

2 (1m 24s):
Peloton isn't just about bikes and treadmills. It's a team of instructors ready to motivate you 24 7. With Peloton, there are literally thousands of classes ranging from strength training and yoga to running and boxing, which means Peloton is the perfect non-judgmental space to experiment with new types of movement at a level in pace that feel good for you. Super busy. It doesn't matter if you have five minutes or an hour. If you're an early riser or a fan of the evening burn, there's a Peloton class that fits into your day. Peloton is where you'll find what works for you on your schedule. Wherever you happen to be at home, at the gym, or even outdoors motivation that moves you time anywhere. Try the Peloton biker tread risk free for 30 days. Learn more@onepeloton.com.

2 (2m 6s):
New members only terms apply.

4 (2m 9s):
I was so obsessed with just doing this service and like say, taking a two hour shopping experience and making it a 32nd shopping experience with the lead containing the thing we thought you should get. I thought it was such a great idea that didn't exist, but I also wanted to grow things really slowly because I was so burned out for the first year. I could only basically work 10 hours a week, but I was not at all sure of how we were gonna make money ever.

0 (2m 45s):
Welcome to How I Built This, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Brian Lamb built a blog to review tech gadgets and gear, grew it slowly on purpose and helped it evolve into wire cutter. One of the most trusted review sites on the internet When it comes to deciding about what to buy or watch or where to vacation. Human beings love a list.

0 (3m 25s):
Best hiking boot, Best hotel, Best stroller, Best College. Best Pizza, best place to live. Best podcast. You've probably seen a list for some or all of these things. And the thing is, many of those lists, even ones that come from seemingly reputable publications, many of them are just written by one or maybe two people. It's just their opinion. There's no empirical evidence or statistical analysis to justify the decisions. So pro tip, be a little wary of those best of lists that you see everywhere. But back in 2011, Brian Lamb had an idea for a different type of list for shoppers, actually a series of lists that would live on a blog called The Wire Cutter.

0 (4m 13s):
He wanted to review electronics and appliances with the same kind of rigor that Consumer Reports was known for, but more streamlined and faster to read. When Brian first thought of the idea for the wire cutter, he was working at the tech blog, Gizmodo, you might remember it as the site that broke the story of the iPhone four, several months before it was released. A story that incurred the wrath of Steve Jobs himself. And we will definitely hear that story because Brian was running Gizmoto at the time, but it was also at Gizmoto that Brian noticed something that stayed with him. The advertising model for blogs incentivized writers to churn out stories as quickly as possible so that readers would keep returning to the site.

0 (5m 2s):
But when Brian launched the wire cutter, he wanted to do things differently. Just a few articles a week meticulously researched and as close to being objective as possible. It was counterintuitive because that model wasn't how blogs made money, but Brian's approach eventually paid off. People trusted the reviews, he hired more writers and traffic and revenue grew. Brian was able to run the wire cutter from his home in Hawaii with a team of writers working remotely. And in 2016, the wire cutter was purchased by one of the most prestigious media companies in the world, The New York Times.

0 (5m 42s):
But before any of that, Brian went through the usual growing pains as a young tech journalist. And before that he spent about five years getting literally punched and kicked at a boxing gym in San Francisco. And we'll hear about that too. Brian grew up mostly in New Jersey. His mom was from mainland China and his dad was born in Hong Kong. And as a kid, Brian spent his summers in Hong Kong with his grandparents. But he says that in one major way, he didn't have a stereotypical immigrant upbringing.

4 (6m 18s):
Yeah, it's true. Like my parents were, were strange compared to other Chinese-Americans parents. Like we weren't really forced to do much at all.

0 (6m 30s):
They, they weren't, they didn't like check your grades and, and and sort of make sure you're doing your homework. They kinda let you do your own thing.

4 (6m 38s):
Yeah, we were just left to our own things. They were making a living.

0 (6m 41s):
Yeah.

4 (6m 42s):
And we were just used to like grabbing our things and playing and just being somewhat self-sufficient. You know, those were the best parts of my childhood, that independence,

0 (6m 54s):
You know, and I, I'm, I'm always really careful when I talk about our generation because it always, you know, you don't wanna sound like, Well, we did this and this was better. But, but I have to say cuz we're in the, we're we're sort of in similar, similar ages. And the, the thing that our parents gave us, our generation was independence because it was basically neglect, not really neglect, but they were working. Like we had to let ourselves in, in, into the front door. Yeah. And like make like pop a pizza on the toast oven and, and then watch TV until they got home. Right. Like, that was my childhood. And but it meant that, and I find this with a lot of my peers and sounds like with you too, it forced us to learn how to be independent very early.

4 (7m 39s):
Yeah. Some of the stuff I did as a kid, I'm like, I would, I can't imagine that happening now. Like I remember being in Hong Kong and like taking a bus to some area and just walking around looking at like electronics and window shopping and just going around and maybe getting a snack, maybe playing like in an arcade if I could sneak in cuz I think it'd be 16 and then getting kicked out cuz I was literally seven when this was happening. Yeah, yeah. And that was just like how you rolled in a place like that then. Yeah.

0 (8m 15s):
And anyone who's been to Hong Kong, especially anyone who's into toys and cool, like stuff that you just would not see in the United States. Hong Kong is like a, it's like Willie Wonka's factory. Like I remember going to Hong Kong, I don't know, maybe 10 years ago, just walking through these streets of just toy shops.

4 (8m 34s):
It was crazy because now you have globalization and like a PlayStation comes out and it's everywhere. But then you'd have like a 2, 3, 4 year gap in technology. Yeah. So you'd have like this chunky walkman only a little bit smaller than like a cigar box. Yes. Right. And then, yeah, in Hong Kong you'd have something just a little bit bigger than the actual cassette tape. Yes. And it would be like half the price. And so my brain would just flip out seeing all this stuff.

0 (9m 5s):
I remember my dad would take business trips to Hong Kong and Japan and come back. He once came back with a, with a Walkman that was smaller than the cassette. The cassette would actually, actually popped out of the Walkman.

4 (9m 17s):
Yeah. I mean, how can you resist buying something like that, honestly. Yeah.

0 (9m 21s):
All right. So you're clearly like, and I mean this is not, it was not necessarily like part of the plan, but as a kid you were already kind of becoming a little bit of a gadget head.

4 (9m 33s):
Yeah, I mean it's really, someone who I work with said, I think you care more about finding the right thing more than anyone I've ever met. And I'm like, that checks out. And really, like in my whole world, a piece of gear you can depend on is honestly a big part of my mental and emotional security. Hmm.

0 (9m 55s):
To do you remember what you were interested in when you were in high school? Cause I know you, you would go on to Boston University and you'd kind of experiment with different majors, jump from different one to, to another, to another. But did you have a sense like of what you thought you wanted to do when, when you left for college?

4 (10m 13s):
Yeah. So I switched, right? I switched from like, I think, I think it was like philosophy, English, computer science, journalism. And then I ended up in business school. Hmm. But the only class I enjoyed was the strategy game. And it was like this rudimentary networked thing where it's like you're in the sneaker industry and you like choose which factories and what pricing and the quantity you wanna produce. And I think I beat like a couple hundred kids at that got super aggressive on pricing. I basically was like cut throw business person long term thinking right away. And I would like undercut them by like two pennies and like win that week. And I just kept winning, winning, winning.

4 (10m 54s):
It

0 (10m 55s):
Was like a, it was like a business school class on strategy.

4 (10m 58s):
Yeah, yeah,

0 (10m 59s):
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So when you, I mean, and we could go down this rabbit hole for a long time, but prob probably not because I, I, I also went to college in, around the same time in Boston and was not from, I was from California, I'm from California. And, and so it was totally alien to me. Like the weather for one thing was just nuts and depressing. Did you study abroad or did you stay in Boston all four years?

4 (11m 23s):
I stayed in Boston. I mean, I really, you know, like people say like, they don't blossom until college or like, you know, Yes. I didn't, I feel like I didn't blossom until like in my forties. You know, like college was just the same difficulty for me as high school. Academically. Socially. It was just rough man. You know.

0 (11m 44s):
Tell me what, tell me more about that. Were you, I mean, cause socially it can just be, you know, some of us are just more introverted. It's just harder for us to kind of like walk into a room and just, Hey, how are you? I'm Brian, I'm guy, whatever. Right? Like, that's, that's very normal. Is that what you mean when you say it was challenging for you? Socially?

4 (12m 4s):
I would like have great friends cared about each other and they'd be like, Let's go to a nightclub. And I remember dragging myself out and I would stand there, it would be super loud. Everyone would be around me, be having fun and I would be falling asleep, standing up almost falling over. Yeah. It's just not engaging to me to spend time. Yeah. Like that. I mean, just emotionally, I don't think I felt safe. I felt more unsafe than most people. Hmm. And it always pushed me to gear, honestly. It always pushed me to like this perfect object, which is like a little, it's like perfect objects are like examples of how you wish the world was and how wish you were in a way.

4 (12m 44s):
Hmm.

0 (12m 46s):
All right. So after you graduate from college, you move out, I guess you move out to San Francisco and get kind of like a starter job as a, as a web developer. But I guess it only, like, it only lasted a few months. Right? Cuz I what like around that same time, the, the.com like whole bubble burst. Right?

4 (13m 4s):
It was like four months or something. And the bubble burst.

0 (13m 6s):
Yeah. And then, And you were laid off. That's right. And that was it. They were just like, you're, you have no job. And you were 22 or I guess 21, 22, around that, that age. Were you worried?

4 (13m 17s):
I had no, I remember everyone crying and I was like, Thank you for the opportunity. I shook their hand and I was like, I'm free. Hmm.

0 (13m 27s):
It from what I understand, which seems like a really unusual move. You did not, you kind of decided not to look for another sort of quote unquote white collar job. You went and actually worked at a boxing gym. Just like basically started by like sweeping the floors and answering phones.

4 (13m 47s):
I was unhireable first of all, I would've gotten the job if I could. I mean, I I, and I'm glad I didn't, but no, I'm happy the way things turned out. But like at that time it was so dire in San Francisco for someone outta school basically. No experience, no technical skills. So I ended up just kind of training at a boxing gym a lot. And then started working for like, I think $5 an hour. Mopping the floors, answering the phone, opening the gym, and like a very early time, maybe like 6:00 AM or something. How

0 (14m 17s):
Did you get into boxing?

4 (14m 19s):
I'd always been into martial arts. I think, you know, when you're, when you're an Asian-American kid, it's very empowering to like watch Bruce Lee films.

0 (14m 28s):
Yeah.

4 (14m 28s):
You know, I know we're stepping back to high school, but like I was super depressed in high school and martial arts was something that really made me feel good. Yeah. Martial arts teaches you, you know, you're tired but you actually do have more and then you start to trust that you have more in you.

0 (14m 43s):
What, what type of martial arts did you do

4 (14m 45s):
In high school? I did like TaeKwonDo, but we dabbled in, my friends would dabble in like judo, jujitsu. I did some kung fu for a while. And then when I got to this gym, I basically, it became my life in San Francisco.

0 (14m 59s):
And it was a boxing gym. It's

4 (15m 0s):
A tie boxing gym and tie. Its run by, it was basically run by former champions of bank in Bangkok who would like come over. And so it was a very good pedigree. It was like world class for sure. Like So you were learning from like a very pure source. Hmm. And my day would be like, open the gym work for like a full shift from like six to something and then I would

0 (15m 23s):
Train and they paid you like 10, They paid you like 10 bucks an hour or something. Dude, it

4 (15m 27s):
Was like less than $5 an at the time. Right. And it's a long time ago, but still, it was like, my rent was like 500 bucks in the mission with like four four roommates or something like that. Yeah. So at this time in my life, I, I was eating a taco for dinner every night. And I would load up on free chips and salsa and it would be like two or three bucks. Right. And if I bought a cd I had to check my budget and it was like a really good time in my life. Remember working out one day after one of those long shifts and you'd do like a seven mile run to warm up. Yeah. And, and then you'd start, you'd start training and then you would start sparring. And I remember being done right before the evening classes came in and lying under the skylight.

4 (16m 11s):
And I remember lying there and just me taking a note. So almost 20 years ago. And I remember saying, this is the most simple and satisfying my life might never be. Hmm.

0 (16m 26s):
You did this for almost four years.

4 (16m 29s):
It was in my life for, for yeah. At least half a decade.

0 (16m 33s):
Yeah. I mean you knew inside of you that, that you, that there were many things that you probably could do. And this was a disciplined life. Like you were at this gym, you were probably getting really strong. But, but did you have a sense in your mind of, of that you were building up towards something? I mean, whether it would be a professional boxer or maybe you would open your own gym at some point, or, or not at all. Was it just like focused entirely on just every single day going in training, going home, eating, sleeping? Yeah.

4 (17m 7s):
I did have a goal, but it wasn't around like a championship belt or going pro, it was just about having like a certain proficiency in flow state. I wanted to be good at it. Hmm. And I also remember my nose bled every day for like almost three years straight. Wow. And I went to a doctor one time at U C S F and he was like, his advice was so useless to me at the time, but in hindsight I see the wisdom. He was like, just stop getting punched in the face.

0 (17m 38s):
Yeah. But clearly at, at some point you were searching for something different because you would eventually go and, and and get an internship at a a at a, at a PC magazine, maximum pc. But how did, before we get to to, to that internship, how did you even start to think about, cause you did some journalism in college, but how did you start to think about like, okay, I gotta I gotta try something else, I gotta do something else. What, what was the, what was the catalyst that led you to start to think about that

4 (18m 10s):
Fear? Hmm. I mean, I, I feel like I have to depend on myself, but Okay. So my family does. Okay. Right. My grandpa did great and all my aunts and uncles pretty much live off my grandpa. What he did. And I remember this one time at dinner, my grandpa was really grizzly and he was gruff. He'd been through a lot and he made it happen. And we have a, we had a very good relationship while he was alive. And I remember him looking around at all my like aunts and uncles and they were like kind of squabbling and, you know, they act like they have no consequence in the world.

4 (18m 52s):
They, they're really like happy go lucky. Right. And I remember my grandpa and he looked over at me, led out his huge sigh and he was like, He's a saying, right. Takes three generations to lose a fortune. And I just remember that moment and I remember looking around and I'm like, I don't really want to, I don't wanna be like my aunts and uncles. I wanna like do something with all my heart and make a living and, and support my loved ones in a very just, you know, basic way. But in my own style. And I think I always had that in the back of my mind.

4 (19m 33s):
Well I'm pretty smart and my brain is worth something and I'm basically getting punched all the time in the head. So it just didn't seem like it was going to go anywhere. And four years is a lot of time and the economy was starting to recover. And so that led to me meeting the editor in chief of a magazine who I had a really like lucky break because I basically screwed up really bad trying to apply for the job.

0 (20m 2s):
This, this was the editor of Maximum PC Magazine.

4 (20m 5s):
That's right. John Phillips.

0 (20m 7s):
How'd you meet him?

4 (20m 8s):
He was a member at the gym.

0 (20m 9s):
Okay. You met him at the gym. Okay. That's

4 (20m 11s):
Right. And I applied for an internship and there was a writing assignment and I, I was so nervous that I didn't have anything written and I just wrote an email saying like, I don't have the assignment. I know what that means in journalism when you're late, please give me another chance. And he was like, Okay. He should have said no. I mean, I would probably say no. I should remember that as I work with young people cuz I, maybe I'm too savage, but he gave me another shot that was a huge deal. I shouldn't have gotten that shot. And man, I killed that job. Like my life depended on it cuz it kind of did.

0 (20m 53s):
And when you say you killed it, you, you got this internship and you just basically threw everything into it.

4 (21m 0s):
Yeah. I mean, when you're working for $5 an hour or less mopping floors of a gym and you went to college for like, whatever, it was like $30,000 a year and I had loans and you're just getting punched in the face every day. You're motivated.

0 (21m 17s):
Yeah. So tell me about that internship. What did you, what did you start to write about?

4 (21m 22s):
I would write like really small reviews.

0 (21m 25s):
Reviews about of, of pro of pc PCs or

4 (21m 29s):
Equipment. That's right. Equipment. I would take really small assignments. And I was only supposed to be there like eight, 10 hours a week. And I ended up working like 40, 50, 60 hours a week to the point where like one issue, you know, like magazine issue articles get pushed and if they're, if they maintain their freshness. So it's not like I did all this in one month, but one issue, even though they had like three or four full-time staffers, I had more than half the content and one issue. Wow. As an intern.

0 (21m 59s):
A and I think you spent like, what, six or seven months at maximum PC before you eventually got an internship at, at Wired, which at the time this, this is like 2004 that it was, I mean still is, but it it was a really important magazine with, with big budgets and I mean it was own, it's owned by Conde Nat. I mean it was a big deal. Right. But it it, it took you a while to get that job right? I think you rejected a few times. Oh

4 (22m 24s):
Yeah. So many times. But when I got that job, I remember asking maximum PC if they wanted to just pay me more and I would stay and John was like, No. Like get outta here.

0 (22m 37s):
How did, do you remember, do you remember feeling intimidated when you got there?

4 (22m 41s):
I think it triggered some kind of defense mechanism where my way of dealing with that is just coming as hard as I can. I just go so hard when I'm in situations like that and I just show up as fully as I can. And I did that there too. Like this is it, this you're not gonna get another chance.

0 (22m 60s):
Yeah.

4 (23m 1s):
Because it was my one shot to have more than a taco for dinner.

0 (23m 7s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Brian gets handed one of the biggest tech stories of the early two thousands and in the process gets the good cop, bad cop treatment from Steve Jobs. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This. Hey everyone, it's me and I've got a really exciting announcement. I have a brand new podcast, it's called The Great Creators.

0 (23m 49s):
And don't worry, I'll still be talking to founders of some of the world's best known brands on how I built this. But on the great creators I'm interviewing your favorite actors and musicians, filmmakers and other artists and talking about where their creativity comes from. In our conversations, you'll hear a side of people you've never heard before. People like world renowned comedian, Stephen Colbert and Nick Kroll. Chart topping musicians like the Chainsmokers and Bjork and revered actors like Adra McDonald, Andy Garcia, and Zoe Day. Chanel follow the great creators with Guy Raz on Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you are listening right now.

0 (24m 29s):
You can listen to new episodes of the great creators one week early on Amazon Music or early and add free by subscribing to Wonder Plus in Apple Podcasts or the Wondery app.

6 (24m 42s):
Hi, I'm Lindsay Graham, the host of Wonder Show. Americans Scandal. We bring to life some of the biggest controversies in US history. Presidential lies, environmental disasters, corporate fraud. In our newest series, we look at the story of Edward Snowden, a whistleblower who changed the national conversation about privacy on the internet as a contractor for the nsa. Snowden had access to a range of top secret government programs, but as he learned more about these clandestine operations, he came to understand a devastating secret. The government was conducting mass surveillance on its own citizens. Snowden would go on to leak more classified documents than any whistleblower in American history. He became the subject of an international manhunt and as he fought to expose the truth, he would risk his own freedom and his family's wellbeing.

6 (25m 26s):
Follow American Scandal on Apple Podcasts, Amazon Music, the Wonder App or wherever you're listening now listen one week early and add free by joining Wonder Plus.

0 (25m 42s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2004. And Brian Lamb has just started an internship at Wired Magazine and over the next few years he'll do a mix of reporting and editing. But really the gig is kind of a mixed bag.

4 (26m 0s):
It was a really good fit. I mean, in a lot of ways, but looking back now, I kind of feel like it's just like most of America where you have to look and be from a certain background or way to advance. So for me, like I didn't smell like an editor there and you know, like frankly, I'm not that smart. I'm not that intellectual. I'm a much more emotional person and that doesn't always fly well in corporations I find.

0 (26m 28s):
And so you really didn't have a a, a big voice there. You were sort of assigned to edit pieces or rewrite things, stuff like that.

4 (26m 38s):
Yeah, I would say that I learned how I don't want to manage people there, to be honest. Yeah. People were non-experienced managers. I remember asking one editor a question about like how the magazine was made and I got thrown outta the office for asking that question.

0 (26m 54s):
What do you mean?

4 (26m 55s):
Like, I was like, Hey, I don't, I'm not sure how this process goes and I'm just curious once it gets past this step where I handed off and the person was just like, I can't believe you're asking me that question and don't know that answer. Get out. It was like really that kind of, you know, leadership. Yeah. And man, I had so many ideas. Half of them were really terrible and half of them were really good and they just all got ignored basically. And I just kind of kept doing the, the gear work.

0 (27m 27s):
Hmm. I I know, I know that you, you would eventually leave Wired a couple of, sort of a couple years in to go on to Gizmoto where you became the editor. Yeah, I think this was around 2006. This Gizmoto was part of the Gawker family of blogs. Blogs were, I mean it was still like early, it was like going to a pod. It was like me going to a podcast in 2011 leaving radio. People were like, What are you doing? That's who listens to podcasts. That's that's what are you crazy you're leaving the radio. That was kind of the reaction, right? That when you decided to leave Wired and go work at Gizmoto in 2006.

4 (28m 7s):
Yeah. San Francisco media is like, it was like simple made at the time and it was wired. Right. So it was just one Conde NAS magazine. People don't leave that place. People stay 10, 20 years longer. And I probably was the first Conde Nast employee to leave for a blog. Blogs were so rudimentary at the time, but when we were doing front of book stuff to find gadgets for wired people around me were like, Yeah, just check out Gizmoto and just find, find leads there. I was like, okay, we're just basically getting leads from blogs. We're not like going to find new stuff.

4 (28m 49s):
Hmm. So I decided to work there because I felt like I could have impact there and control over the editorial.

0 (28m 54s):
I, I read that you were like working like 15, 16 hour days, just, just constantly updating, constantly cranking out copy. Like nonstop seven days a week.

4 (29m 8s):
Yeah. We had a, we had really savage competitors and it was just us in the room at the time and we just drove each other to be better.

0 (29m 14s):
Who were your competitors? Tech Crunch. Cnet?

4 (29m 17s):
No, it was just End Gadget.

0 (29m 19s):
End Gadget. Okay. And stories about like any, any news related to the tech, like gossip, Like what was, what were you covering? Anything, any personnel changes at a tech company like news you heard or was it more about products?

4 (29m 37s):
It was about products and like, they kept it strictly about products but we got into like, we were really experimental about it and when I got there they wanted traffic. That's what Gawker wanted at the time. Right. Unapologetically traffic didn't matter. Go get it. And there was a bonus system for traffic. Very cocker, but it was tied to equity. Right.

0 (30m 3s):
Meaning what

4 (30m 4s):
If the, if you exceeded your traffic goals by a certain amount, you get a certain amount of equity.

0 (30m 8s):
Okay. Okay.

4 (30m 9s):
Yep. And so for my brain, that's just great cause even without the bonus I'm gonna do it. Right. And I think within two or three months it's, it's been a while, but within a couple months, certainly less than four or five months they shut the program down because I had exceeded the traffic so much that I ended up owning in two months, like over 1% of the company.

0 (30m 31s):
Wow.

4 (30m 33s):
I was like one of the largest shareholders just based on those two or three months.

0 (30m 36s):
Oh my god.

4 (30m 36s):
And I only confirmed that like a year or two ago. Yeah. When there was paperwork for like sale of goer and then I talked to some of the finance people and they're like, Oh yeah, you didn't know you had like a lot, you had more equity than like most people who weren't there from the very beginning. And like Gizmoto probably made most of the revenue of that company. Wow.

0 (30m 57s):
Cause

4 (30m 57s):
It's technology and we were big, you know,

0 (30m 60s):
And you were getting ads. A lot of ads.

4 (31m 2s):
Yeah.

0 (31m 3s):
And where did you work out of an office? Was it like, would you go into an office every day with a couple other people?

4 (31m 9s):
I worked from home and I worked right next to my fridge and whenever we get scooped I'd eat like an ice cream sandwich like 10 in the morning. I would eat an ice cream sandwich. I would just eating every time we got scooped. That's how I gain like 30 pounds in that job.

0 (31m 23s):
So Gizmoto was never, there was never an office. It was entirely remote.

4 (31m 29s):
Yeah. I think at some point there was a move to like get everyone into an office and Yeah, we were just like, no. Yeah. Which is a very modern thing, you know, But I worked remote the entire job.

0 (31m 39s):
I'm trying to figure out how you did it then without Zoom and Slack and all that stuff. That makes it so much easier. Now

4 (31m 45s):
There were some precursors to Slack that we used. I don't remember them now. Aim

0 (31m 51s):
Probably

4 (31m 51s):
Is what we used. Yeah, yeah. We are using, Oh my God, you're right. We were using

0 (31m 56s):
Aim. Aim. You're using aim. Yeah.

4 (31m 58s):
We built a 300 million media company on aim.

0 (32m 2s):
It's Right. Amazing. But I mean it's in a sense it's like the parallel between what you're doing at Gizmoto and at the gym to me seemed very similar because you were just focused. It was like you're going in, you're just like working out and just exhausting yourself and eating dinner and going sleep. And it was the same. Sounds like it was a similar kind of rhythm at, at Gizmoto

4 (32m 26s):
It's only a partial evolution going from being punched in the face in real life to being punched in the face. In the comment section

0 (32m 34s):
I wanna talk about, I wanna ask you about probably the thing that you're, anyone who knows the Gizmoto story knows this story, but not many people listening may know it, which is the biggest scoop of Gizmoto is life, which happened on your watch and b basically you, you guys got a hold of an, an iPhone 4G months before it was to be released was or a year, maybe a year. It was a prototype. And, and it's actually an amazing story because it was, it was written a lot about it. There's been a lot written about it and it's certainly at the time, but this was like a big deal. Apple was really pissed off.

0 (33m 16s):
How did you, what do you remember about about getting that that phone?

4 (33m 21s):
Yeah, it went down. Something like that. But there's a backstory to it, which is earlier that year we were so good at our jobs and so bored. So we were at that time doing what I now know a lot of places do. But we were pre-writing stories and we would pre-write multiple versions of stories. Hmm.

0 (33m 39s):
You would pre-write, it's almost like, like newspapers have obituaries ready to go. So when someone dies it's just plugging a couple quotes. You were basically doing that for everything. You had versions of stories written because you could anticipate what, what, what might happen.

4 (33m 54s):
Yeah. We were very prepared, very fast backup plans. And so we started just dreaming about like scenarios to plan for them to being prepared in one of these scenarios, like earlier in that year we talked about fantasized really about what if we got a prototype of an iPhone.

0 (34m 16s):
So months before this phone even got to you, you, you, you were all sort sitting around saying, what if we got an iPhone early, let's prepare for that possibility.

4 (34m 26s):
Yeah. We, we went to our lawyer in house and said, Can you look this up? What would happen? How we can do this safely, legally? And we discovered these laws about returning stolen property. You can't get in trouble for it basically. And the person who claims the property has to claim it formally.

0 (34m 45s):
Wow. So turns out that this guy, an Apple engineer had accidentally left the new iPhone at a, at a restaurant in, in Redwood City. This guy Brian Hogan found it and started calling around different, different blogs to see if somebody wanna buy it. Does that, is that what happened?

4 (35m 4s):
Yes. I know he contacted Wired and he contacted another publication, maybe End Gadget and they all started just kind of like not sure what to do. They didn't have a plan and they were slow

0 (35m 15s):
And they were worried that they'd get sued.

4 (35m 17s):
Yeah. And we already checked that aspect out so we were able to move quickly and we knew we were never gonna have a bigger story than that.

0 (35m 26s):
So you guys decided to publish a story about this new iPhone and, and you could see new features on it and you could talk about those features and Apple was not happy. You, you get a call from, from a one Steve Jobs from, from what I understand, he calls you up.

4 (35m 51s):
Yes. He got my number through a mutual acquaintance and yeah, it was like every book I've ever read on Steve Jobs's personality, but on the phone.

0 (36m 1s):
What'd he say to you

4 (36m 3s):
Here? Steve's a good cop. You know, Hey, you have my phone, I really like it back. I'm not mad at you. You know, our guy lost it and I go, I understand. You know, and I, I knew what to say from reading like every book on Apple. I knew what to expect.

0 (36m 23s):
And this is, so this is before you published anything? They just were aware that you had it? Oh

4 (36m 27s):
No. Oh no. You published it. This was like after we published it. Okay. And I said, We're happy to get it back to you. It's always been our intent, but we need you to verify it's actually yours. And he said, Well I don't want to do that. I go, Well it's the law. We can't,

0 (36m 43s):
What did, what did you need from him? Like a formal letter, a statement saying this to

4 (36m 47s):
Phone letter. Yeah. And then bad cop came. He was like, you know, this is serious stuff. You can go to jail for this. And I just said I would love to go to jail for an iPhone. Cuz I was just thinking about how much traffic we could make from it. God, I mean how much more legendary would that story been if we went to jail? I mean he knew that at that point that I think Steve also understands my understanding of Steve Jobs from talking to, you know, people who work in Apple and he just understands when he finds someone who also is fully committed.

0 (37m 26s):
Yeah.

4 (37m 27s):
And so at that point he kind of just backed off and he got the letter written and I knew that we would impact sales and I was glad because you shouldn't buy, you shouldn't buy the old thing right before the new one comes out at the same price. Right. Especially cuz you're gonna keep these things for multiple years. Right. And like that's a really big deal for people spending their money. You know, these things cost so much money now. So I felt very spiritually engaged in this idea of this telling people to wait. Cuz most people have no idea about the timing and the cadence of product release. And I think he was really upset for many months. Like he would, he would probably against all advice, would go to like a conference where he was speaking and he would start talking about Gizmoto being horrible randomly.

4 (38m 15s):
He was really obsessed with that, that moment where he was told what to do.

0 (38m 20s):
Wow.

4 (38m 21s):
You know, he was able to dominate entire industries and hear these like honestly pretty stupid bloggers telling him what to do. That probably doesn't feel good.

0 (38m 32s):
I, I'm curious because from what I gather, I mean listening to this story now, and this is, we're talking about something that happened, I don't know, 13 years ago. It's kind of amazing, right? Cuz he was so powerful and you were standing up to him and you had the justification to write about this. But you, but from what, what I understand, you felt you, you started to feel bad about this.

4 (38m 60s):
Yeah. It's hard not to respect Steve Jobs, even if you are the editor in chief at Gizmoto and you have a job to do. And so I just, I wrote this blog post about what happened and how I felt about things and I had very mixed feelings because so many of the values at Apple, I, you have to respect to someone who eventually would start a company and try to do things in a way that's uncompromisingly good. And so yeah, I just had a twinge of regret.

0 (39m 36s):
You, you wrote that, you wrote that article after you left Con after you left Gizmoto.

4 (39m 41s):
Yeah, I wrote it way later. I was just like, that was a really crazy situation and it's, I had so much respect for the people at Apple and that culture, so that's always been complicated.

0 (39m 57s):
What, within a year. I mean, that was the biggest story that Gizmoto ever broke for sure. But from, from what I understand, you were just, I mean, and I can't, I can't believe it took this long. I mean, you were at, you were at Gizmoto for like, I don't know, almost five years and just a relentless pace, just nonstop writing and you had a bit of a sabbatical, but just relentless that by the time you're 34 you're burned out, you're just totally burned out.

4 (40m 31s):
Yes. And I think I had some kind of record for staying editor in chief for quite a long time by Cocker standards. And it's because I had a really good team and I was getting better delegating and managing and they protected me, I protected them. And that's the only way I was able to stay there that long.

0 (40m 51s):
All right, so around this time, like 2011 or so, you left goer, but, but I also think around this time that you were, you were all, I think you were already kind of forming a plan for what would become wire cutter, right?

4 (41m 7s):
Yeah. I had the idea for wire cutter while I was still at goer. You know, we hadn't really fully formed the idea, but it was impossible to figure out what to buy quickly on almost any site with any sort of secure emotional feeling about that choice being good.

0 (41m 25s):
Why just, there was just not enough information or there just wasn't a good place that was giving advice.

4 (41m 32s):
The, the information is out there on the tip of the tongues of the editors covering those beats, but the formats that were common and the business models attached to them encourage you to click on like 40 different articles about say TVs for example. And then you have to compare all of them and their prices and their features and decide which one's right for you. And that's a lot of work or a little work if you don't care. But it's a lot of math and it's a lot of just, you have to figure it out.

4 (42m 14s):
And every major publication at the time would do that. They would just force you to sort through dozens and dozens of reviews or look at a huge chart full of like circles and dots that Oh yeah. Really mean anything. Yeah. And it's just really stressful. We just knew that I didn't want to have that experience of hunting through blog archives and reviews and user reviews and collating all that in my head. Turning it into like a soup and then drinking the soup.

0 (42m 49s):
You, you thought there needs to be an easier way, like, like an easier consumer reports kind of thing, like a review site that would just review stuff, but that would basically say to people, this is the one you wanna buy. Like was that fully formed?

4 (43m 6s):
That's the concept. And believe it or not, that didn't exist very readily at the time, if at all.

0 (43m 12s):
So, so why you were at, while you were at, at Goer Media, did you, did you go to anyone there and say, I have this great idea, I think I wanna do this or Oh yeah,

4 (43m 21s):
You did. Yes. I had this idea I wanted to do it and just nobody wanted to do it. Hmm. Yeah, I pitched it for Wired, I pitched it to a lot of places and nobody wanted to do it. And like so many good ideas, you can't get people to take it for free.

0 (43m 41s):
Yeah.

4 (43m 44s):
You know, I had a promising career if I wanted to pursue tech news and writing about things and I had at some point negotiated some really crazy job offers that I couldn't pull the trigger on. Hmm. Something was just telling me not to do these things because it was gonna be same old thing working for big corporations, which I have a problem working for. I just not compatible with that

0 (44m 13s):
At this point. You're 34, you're out, you've left Gawker, did you leave San Francisco at this point and move to Hawaii or were you still in San Francisco?

4 (44m 24s):
I started wire cutter first

0 (44m 26s):
In San Francisco.

4 (44m 27s):
That's right.

0 (44m 29s):
All right, so tell me how you did that. I mean, was it, it initially just you writing in a blog and then like just writing about what you already owned? Like tell me, tell me how you, the first thing you wrote under the, the word, the term wire cutter.

4 (44m 45s):
I wrote the first bunch of guides, couple dozen and my edited the first couple hundred and it was always just a combination of aggregation of what was out there plus my own verifications at the end. Hmm. We would take a layer of the shopping experience and stack that on top of all the information out there and do some verification so you wouldn't have to do that whole shopping process yourself.

0 (45m 12s):
I, you keep saying we, but I'm assuming initially it was just you

4 (45m 17s):
At the very start. But I very quickly started bringing friends in. Okay.

0 (45m 20s):
And so from what I gather, you, you partnered with the A, which is a, which was like a, another kind of media company, like a group, a loose group of blogs. What was their role? They, they would, it was your site or your blog, but they would finance it. Like what, what was that, what was the

4 (45m 40s):
Story? Do you remember back in the day it was possible through these advertising agencies to get launch sponsorships

0 (45m 47s):
Sort? I mean, so yeah, explain, explain what, what that, what that meant. These

4 (45m 52s):
Don't really exist anymore, but you could pitch an idea for a new site to a company and they would basically take over the advertising for that entity. So we had a launch sponsorship deal to start this thing and that is a lot nicer than raising money and it's a lot nicer than starting it and just hoping to sell ads after the fact.

0 (46m 17s):
So that money was designed to finance as much of the early site as as possible?

4 (46m 23s):
That's correct. And I think it was like a quarter million dollars, but then the advertising agency took half and then the all took all of it because I didn't want, I just needed money for expenses, but something about it felt like I didn't wanna pay myself yet.

0 (46m 40s):
Yeah. How did you retain, how did you retain ownership of, of the intellectual property?

4 (46m 46s):
At the time they were doing like 50 50 splits with site owners. Right. Which is not advised because then no one can make a decision. Yeah. Someone should be a majority owner. So I negotiated to give up all the launch sponsorship for 65% of the site. But I also had a clause in there saying that if I didn't feel like things were going well, I could basically leave and take the entire company with me. Got

0 (47m 12s):
It. Smart decision. So, so you registered the name the wire cutter, like you got that domain name.

4 (47m 20s):
Yeah. And the name was really arbitrary. I'd learned that from talking with JJ Abrams at one point,

0 (47m 28s):
The, the director JJ Abrams.

4 (47m 30s):
Yeah. It was just the connection I had through a friend and I asked him about naming things. I had this really complicated name and he basically told me in a nutshell, if you name something a really boring word, you can like own that word, like lost or alias. Right. It's those super simple names, but you have to show up, you have to really own 'em by doing something impactful

0 (47m 56s):
When we come back, have Brian's plan to grow the wire cutter very, very slowly. Does not sit well with the suits. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2011 and Brian Lamb has just launched a new blog called The Wire Cutter, kind of a streamlined site for reviewing electronics and technical gear.

0 (48m 46s):
You had to review a lot of things. So would you buy like 20 headphones or did you go to the companies and say, Hey, send them this to us.

4 (48m 54s):
We'd go to the companies and send us stuff. Okay. It's pretty much industry standard, you know, and it's not yours, it's a loan. So you send it back or you donate it if they don't want it.

0 (49m 3s):
How did you, how did you train or guide the people who were doing reviews? Like let's say, or, or even you, like how did you, you know, how did you test these things? You, let's say it was television sets and, and you had somebody write an article. What advice would you give them? You, cuz presumably they're not just gonna watch, you know, 15 minutes on each tv, they really gotta spend time with it. So how would you suggest they, they put these different television sets, for example, to the test?

4 (49m 35s):
The trade of editing reviews is a pretty established culture.

0 (49m 40s):
Yeah.

4 (49m 41s):
You, you find a writer that's on the beat. TVs are hard because people don't have space, so that's as very difficult writer to fill, but you can find them. But very early on there were steady freelancers who came on and started doing regular work and they had to take a lot of convincing to start working with me. Yeah. And these are some of the best reviewers in the field and I was very much working hand in hand with them during the process. Whereas that does not happen at all in front of book stuff. You just get an assignment and you come back with some copy and some picks. Got it. But I was like, no, I want to develop the test with you. I want to talk about these things.

4 (50m 21s):
Let me see your list of things that you think could be good. You forgot about this brand. And that's how I steered things. And it was more the way that craft people are trained than they are in like mass media. It's like more of an apprenticeship happening all the time. And once people heard that we were doing things better and different, say instead of a front of the book, a couple hundred dollars for review, we were offering several thousand dollars to do the same work

0 (50m 50s):
To a reviewer.

4 (50m 51s):
Yeah. Because it was hourly and really what you're investing in is the expertise of that writer. They're on that beat.

0 (50m 57s):
And what, what, what did you, I mean, what we will think of as of wire cutter today is reviewer or reviewers. They, they really put like five or six, maybe 10 different brands of, of a product, a TV or a washing machine or a coffee traveler mug or whatever to the test. And they really, really run them through, you know, try them out in, in different places and, and then they basically pick one, Was that the model at the beginning?

4 (51m 26s):
That was the model at the beginning. But very quickly it evolved into a mutant form of that which was way more powerful. Like for example, if you review 20 headphones normally on the internet before wire cutter, you had thousands of opinions on headphones that were subjective and maybe you had a few people who were professionals who would objectively record things. So we had a process that involved both of those things and a blind test with musicians, audio engineers. And surprisingly, most of those people would agree on which one sounded better blindly. So even though it's a subjective thing with enough process, you can make it a little bit more objective.

4 (52m 8s):
And here's the thing that makes it even cooler. Now that you've got the top two or three, the next time you can introduce another 40 and you don't have to compare the new 50 to the previous 50, you just have to compare it to the current kings of the hill and see if they get de thrown. You now have tested a total of 100. And so as you work on this evergreen article with updates over a decade now it's probably hundreds if not over a thousand headphones that get tested.

0 (52m 39s):
And that, from what I read, was really what guided you. You did not want a wire cutter article review to be, you know, one and done. You wanted it to be to be something that could live on for a long time. That's

4 (52m 55s):
Correct. And it's basically a distillation of if someone, say you knew that headphone writer and you're like, Hey, I need to buy some headphones, it's for this, which one should I get? And they would tell you, Oh, if you have a hundred bucks by this one or if you have 200 bucks by this one, that's a very humanistic, that's a very human experience, but not everyone has access to someone like that. And that's what we were trying to put down on paper. And ultimately even on a higher level than that, we were trying to give you that feeling of just how sure you feel when someone tells you that.

0 (53m 31s):
So when you, when you started to, I mean, so, so basically were you financing this out of your own bank account or, or was the launch money enough to pay the writers for the first, I don't know, several months until you start to get some, some revenue?

4 (53m 49s):
I had like one or two writers then, and I think I paid that out of the all that long sponsorship money. Right. But we weren't really like humming along yet. Right. It was just me living off of savings and, and I was in a real head space of just recovering. And that's when I moved to Hawaii and I slept on a friend's couch for like six months swimming and just working on this. And Hawaii gave me my energy back and every time I'd publish something, a little more energy would build the project started feeding me and the feedback from other people in the industry, other people started to see that it was crazy work.

0 (54m 31s):
So here's, here's what I'm curious about because I think from the get go, you decided that advertising was not gonna be your revenue stream. That was not how this site was going to become sustainable. Yeah. And by the way, when you lo when you launched Wire Cutter, did you think this could make a lot of money or did you think, I know it can be sustainable, I know it can sustain a, a team of people or both?

4 (54m 54s):
I was so obsessed with just doing this service and like say taking a two hour shopping experience and making it a 32nd shopping experience with the lead containing the thing we thought you should get. I thought it was such a great idea that didn't exist. I was not at all sure of how we were gonna make money ever. Hmm. But I also wanted to grow things really slowly because I was so burnt out for the first year. I could only basically work 10 hours a week. And I think my partners must have been like, You're only gonna publish one article every three weeks. And I said, Yep. Hmm. And I knew that if you projected that over a couple years you'd have like a hundred articles that were evergreen.

4 (55m 42s):
But that cadence is so alien to media and to investors and to the public. But I knew working at Gawker where we were doing so much quantity of news that would become basically useless tomorrow. It was a good use of time.

0 (55m 58s):
Right. Because you guys were still partnered with the all which managed a a bunch of different blogs and I'm guessing that their business side may, may not have been too happy with, you know, the sort of relaxed approach you were taking, right? I mean they, were they okay with what you were doing?

4 (56m 16s):
Yeah, so basically when you are a business person running multiple sites, you don't have the focus to under, to basically switch into a completely different way of making money. It's too hard, it's too much work to, to reinvent a whole business model for one site that looks really small. And so there was just no attention and no support for like this format. Like we were asked if we wanted to do news and I was like, I don't want to do news. Of course we could have done all this stuff that basically everyone does when they start a media company. Like, we could've done all that stuff, I didn't wanna do it. Yeah. And we just felt like we had no choice but to leave, sadly.

0 (56m 59s):
To leave

4 (57m 0s):
The, All right.

0 (57m 4s):
So when you decided to kind of take this independent of the all, which happened pretty soon early on, you would land on this sort of this affiliate model where if somebody would click on the product that your, you think is the best product, you would get a cut of that?

4 (57m 24s):
Yes. That's correct.

0 (57m 26s):
I'm, I'm wondering how that worked. Did you have to, because you're, you are, I mean yes, you had a reputation as a good writer and you are known quantity, but you still had to get the companies to agree to pay you a fee if people bought something through your site. Was that hard to do or was that relatively easy to get these companies to agree to that?

4 (57m 47s):
Well, the truth is, we would link up all sorts of stuff and any of the really cool stuff would not have affiliate links on them because you're right, that's a lot of work. But for like the majority of the electronics, we could link to Amazon or Best Buy, and that was pretty easy to do.

0 (58m 7s):
They had like an affiliate program that you could just sign up for?

4 (58m 10s):
Yes. The affiliate program was like super cheap marketing for them and it was designed to live on mom and pop blogs. Hmm. So they'd have all these like cheesy widgets if, if like some blogger wrote about something they liked and they could link on Amazon and make a few bucks. That's what that was designed for. It was never designed for the scale of like big media companies that use it now.

0 (58m 35s):
So, So you, you wouldn't have to negotiate with Samsung or Whirlpool or GE or whatever. You were really negoti not negotiating. You were just signing up for the AM initially the Amazon affiliate program that was available to any, anyone who had a blog or a website. That's correct. And, and with those affiliate links, you probably don't even know what they were paying you. It's probably just pennies or a few dollars. Right. Per, I mean, if somebody were to buy something, maybe you guys would get a couple bucks off that. So it initially, it probably wasn't a whole lot of money, but that was a revenue stream or it was the revenue stream.

4 (59m 9s):
That's correct. And as a ceo, I never checked anything like traffic or I knew the size of the checks coming, but I didn't pay attention to anything except the quality of the work.

0 (59m 22s):
I, I'm curious, I mean, did you, I mean you had a, people knew who you were from Gizmoto obviously in San Francisco for sure. And you had a, a reputation for, you know, for being a solid editor. But how were you getting the word out about wire cutter? Did you have like a big social media presence? Were you doing that kind of marketing? Like how did people discover it at all?

4 (59m 46s):
We did no marketing. We were mostly editors. We didn't have business people, we didn't have social media people. We were really light. We had no offices. Hmm. I really liked having a silent media company because it's just like all of media is like this party where everyone's talking over each other and saying the same things other people are saying, even worse, they're spending money on reporting, duplicating other people's work. And so I just wanted to contribute in this way that was different and the power and focus of it, I think caught people off guard in our industry.

4 (1h 0m 26s):
And it was all word of mouth.

0 (1h 0m 29s):
So you were really, I mean, it sounds like you were motivated by just like something that you would've wanted, Right. Which is just to save people time. Just like trust us where we're gonna do the work for you and you can have this information for free, but if you do wanna buy it, you know, maybe click the link that, that was basically your how you would kind of present this to to to readers and consumers.

4 (1h 0m 56s):
That's right. And I think I'd expand on that and say, I really love service work because you're helping someone. You're not just writing for your own ego. And at the same time, I'm not egoless. I love to compete and I feel like I could do better work than billion dollar companies with huge budgets with a small team that is motivated.

0 (1h 1m 22s):
Yeah. So here, here's what I'm curious about, right? You start this site in 2011, really 2012, it gets going and there was consumer reports that existed. Like you, you still to this day, you can subscribe to it and, and read it. And I wonder if you, once you start to get some attention, did you start to hear some, did you start to get some blow back from those traditional, more traditional review sites that, I don't know, were maybe saying, Oh, well they're accepting affiliate dollars or they're compromised or any, anything like that? Did that, did you start to hear any of that?

4 (1h 1m 59s):
I think editors were freaking out and other publications because they wanted a format like that and business people were maybe scared of that change because you're talking about a severe loss of time on page and traffic. If someone's just clicking on one article and leaving in two minutes, they have to understand that can lead to a different type of business and a better service. But you're also sacrificing maybe 50 page views and like an hour on your site. It's significant. Yeah. So the people were really slow to move and at first I was scared people were gonna copy. And then I realized that big companies are incapable of really competing in that way.

0 (1h 2m 40s):
And, and from the get go, you knew that advertising was just not a direction you wanted to take because it, it was, it was basically a race to the bottom to, to chase those ads.

4 (1h 2m 49s):
I think advertising is one of the great evils of the world because it gets in your brain no matter what. And the metrics they use are basically what has made media what it is today. Like really shallow fast cadence. And it's crazy that if you are like a high end brand for like a watch or something, it's crazy that you don't want to help reverse that because you are amazing watches need to live next to like BS top 10 lists or like a magazine you flip through in like five minutes that they took a month to put together.

4 (1h 3m 31s):
Yeah. It's all just like really trashy and I can't wait for this trend to reverse and reverse in more areas than just what wire cutter did around product.

0 (1h 3m 44s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 3m 45s):
And the other thing is if someone returns something that you recommend, the affiliate fee gets reversed, you get zero. You can't say that for like the Rolex ad next to the top 10 list or something factually incorrect, the advertiser never gets that money back for being next to articles that are terrible. So, and the readers don't get that time back on clickbait. So it, for me it's more ethical.

0 (1h 4m 9s):
Yeah. I think about two years in, you started to see some profitability enough where you could pay yourself a little bit of money. But did you, I mean, I know that you started this because you really wanted to do it, it was exciting and interesting to you, but at a certain point did you start to see potential for this to actually be a significant generator of, of revenue for you?

4 (1h 4m 36s):
Yes. By the fourth year or the third year it was making seven figures of profit. So it was a pretty quick transition from nothing to something for something that I owned the majority of.

0 (1h 4m 54s):
Yeah. How did you, I mean, how did you hire people? I mean were these, were a lot of the people that you hired, reporters or journalists that you'd worked with previously?

4 (1h 5m 4s):
No, we would find a beat, we'd find someone crazy and obsessed and we would bring them in and it'd be a big investment to teach them our format. But we would do it and half the people didn't work out. And I think even more important than hiring was firing. Yeah. Like when it's your company and you're paying someone six figures to do something and they don't do it, it's literally, you know, taking a hundred thousand dollars in a stack and then lighting it on fire. Yeah. It's very painful. And you can't survive that way. And you can't take care of the people who are good that way.

0 (1h 5m 35s):
How many, how many people did you have before you will get to the acquisition? How many ultimately were people did you have on payroll? Full-time payroll

4 (1h 5m 45s):
When we sold about 60 and I think the sweet spot was under 30 in terms of everyone being on the same page culturally.

0 (1h 5m 51s):
Wow. All right. So let's talk about the acquisition. I mean you, the New York Times announced that they were acquiring wire cutter, remember this in October of 2016 for 30 million. What, what led you to seek out an acquirer?

4 (1h 6m 8s):
You know what's really funny is that number's actually wrong. Hmm. It was a leak that was incorrect, but the times published it, it was more, but it wasn't an extraordinary amount. Yeah. I always knew that we would end up at the times I thought it could fit in there from an editorial standpoint. I had an introduction to some of the Salzberg and I told them about what we were doing and I said, I love the times and I believe the times deserves better and the readers deserve better service. And so there was another meeting after that meeting where I said, let's do a collaboration. So I commissioned a cheap printer test and I said, We actually found the best cheap printer you can do this work if you are motivated enough to do it.

4 (1h 6m 53s):
And we did a collaboration. It was one of the most trafficked pieces they had because it had that wire cutter punch of we were actually doing the work. And so we did more collaborations. And then one day I got an email from someone on the strategy team saying, Do you ever think about selling? And I was like, Yeah, I've thought about it before. And we started a process.

0 (1h 7m 17s):
It's pretty remarkable. I mean five years more or less within five years of launching this thing, you took it from nothing. An idea to a, a company that sold to the New York Times for, you know, more than 30 million. I mean that's, I mean if you and didn't, probably didn't feel that way at the time, but that's, that's pretty great. I mean that's pretty fast.

4 (1h 7m 43s):
It's fast considering it was bootstrapped more or less. Yeah. And it's fast considering the first year I was only working on it 10 hours a week cuz that's all I had.

0 (1h 7m 52s):
That's all you had to give cuz you were so burned out. Yeah. So once you sold it, that was gonna be it for you. I mean, you were not gonna be running the business, you weren't gonna be in charge of it, you weren't gonna be leading a team anymore, you were kind of gonna be out and was that okay? Were you okay with that?

4 (1h 8m 13s):
If I could do it again, I would've negotiated a job for myself because I thought I'd be hovering like an owner does. Yeah. You basically, as an owner, you put yourself where you're needed and then as soon as you can hire for that need, you go to the next need and you keep building. But that doesn't work in a big company. And also it's not really great to have someone like me around if you're trying to establish yourself as like the new leadership to be honest. Yeah. So I really think there's wisdom in what they did, which was they put me in an advisory role and I got to work alongside the person running wire cutter from a business standpoint for many years. And it was really, it was really wonderful.

0 (1h 8m 55s):
All right, now I, I have to raise this because it's important and I, it's something that I is on my mind as a citizen of the world. I, I love wire cutter, I think it's awesome. I check it all the time. But what I don't like about it is it, and, and you can even make this accusation about how I built this, by the way, is that it encourages consumerism, it encourages us to buy more crap. Yeah. And everybody wants to have a bunch of stuff, you know, kitchen gadgets and audio video stuff and a new tv And is any part of you conflicted about wire cutter and that it does, you could argue it does encourage people to just buy more crap.

4 (1h 9m 40s):
I definitely am, let's put it this way, if I were starting something now, it wouldn't necessarily be about things.

0 (1h 9m 47s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 9m 47s):
But since that's kind of my wheelhouse, maybe it would be, but would have to be in a way that's more in tune with today's values.

0 (1h 9m 57s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 9m 58s):
You know, I spend most of my time these days fixing up this old house and I'm basically talking with craftsman all day. And I have started to build and practice craft myself, specifically woodworking with Japanese hand tools. And like a lot of these tools are made by hand, by blacksmiths. And the speed of craft and the values of craft are so precious and humbling to me. And I've started to recognize that the best media is also like craft the best podcast, the best books, the best. Everything is not capitalistic at scale.

4 (1h 10m 41s):
It still needs to be capitalistic. People need to afford their way of life and their tools. But that scale is something I'm really allergic to. Now

0 (1h 10m 53s):
When, when you think about where you landed, you know, you're in a boxing gym 20 years ago and here you are retired, semi-retired, but, but you know, able to focus on craft and woodworking and financially secure. Do you think that is because of your incredible hard work and dedication and intelligence? Or do you think there's part of that is is you got lucky.

4 (1h 11m 20s):
I mean obviously all of the above, but it's really just mostly hard work and skill and then I guess I believe luck is like being able to be in those situations for long enough for things to work out.

0 (1h 11m 41s):
That's Brian Lamb founder of Wire Cutter by the way. Brian no longer boxes, but since moving to Hawaii, he has become an avid surfer with a kind of insane collection of surfboards, like 50 of them.

4 (1h 11m 56s):
It's the cadence of surfing too in like waves is really what informed wire cutter is cadence, which is slow and clean and like impactful as opposed to a bunch of like tiny little waves knocking all over the place in a messy way.

0 (1h 12m 12s):
Yeah, that's a great sport. It's a great sport for your whole body.

4 (1h 12m 17s):
Yeah, it's good. I'm glad I didn't discover it earlier because

0 (1h 12m 20s):
That's all you would do.

4 (1h 12m 21s):
I'd, I'd be busting tables man. It's like bad to discover surfing too early.

0 (1h 12m 26s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact our team, our email address is h i t@id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter or Instagram, our account is at how I built this and mine is at Guy Roz on Twitter and on Instagram at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Josh Lash with music composed by Run Arab Louey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Liz Metzker, Alex Chung, Kerry Thompson, Catherine Cipher, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Messi, and Carla Estevez.

0 (1h 13m 8s):
Our audio engineer was Robert Rodriguez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey everyone. So I wanted to make sure you knew of all the different ways you can listen to how I built this. The show is always free and available wherever you listen to podcasts, whether it's Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now.

0 (1h 13m 53s):
But if you wanna listen to the next episode of How I Built This Today, one Week Early, you can do that on Amazon Music or you can listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts or on the Wondery app. So please do follow us on your podcast app so you always have the latest episode downloaded and get your How I Built This merch and gear@wondershop.com. Another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks.