0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth. By 2.5 times find easy, flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

1 (19s):
This episode was recorded in 2021 from luminary built-in productions and NPR it's wisdom from the top stories of crisis failure, turnaround and triumph from some of the greatest leaders in the world. I'm guy Roz, and on the show today, Indra Nooyi, former CEO of PepsiCo.

3 (45s):
I wasn't intending to interfere in what the division presidents were doing, but if I felt that something was not okay in terms of the target was too high or too low, I spoke up. So I'd say, well, I tell you what guys you say, you're going to grow 10. I ran all the models we do at corporate. I don't see it growing at 10. You couldn't just have me be a

1 (1m 8s):
Indra. Nooyi, went from selling textiles thread door to door, to running one of the world's biggest food and beverage companies. PepsiCo. As recently as 2020, there were more people named James and Michael running fortune 500 companies. Then there were women on that list in 2021, the number of women leading fortune 500 companies hit an all time record of 41 or about 8% of the biggest companies in the world. And when Indra Nooyi joined PepsiCo in the mid nineties as a senior VP of strategic planning, there were exactly zero women on that list.

1 (1m 54s):
In our first years at the company, she was frequently second guessed by her male colleagues. She remembers being told that her ideas for quote, destroying the culture of the company, but she had a spark, a super sharp mind and an intense determination to modernize and future-proof Pepsi, which would help her push past the doubters and the naysayers. And in 2006, Indra was named CEO of Pepsi becoming only the fifth CEO in the company's history, a position she'd go on to hold for 12 years. During her time at Pepsi, she was consistently ranked one of the 100 most powerful women in the world.

1 (2m 36s):
Today. She serves on the boards of Amazon and the international cricket council, and she's just written an autobiography called my life in full it's. A storied career that started at the ground level. At one point, just out of school, Indra was selling textiles door to door in her home country of India. Andrew was born in 1955 in Chennai, then mudras. And she was born into a world pretty far removed from where she'd end up

3 (3m 6s):
Was born barely eight years after India got independence. So this was very early in the days of India as a young democracy and the country was still getting his footing. And in those days, mudras in the south was really a nerdy sleepy town. Social life was almost non-existent and the city came to live around four or five in the morning and probably went to sleep at eight o'clock, eight o'clock would be stretching it. There was no restaurants that really were open on the streets. All stores were shot, the roads were absolutely empty. It was a whole different life and a environment that I grew up in

1 (3m 48s):
Your father worked for the state bank.

3 (3m 52s):
He was a bank manager. Then he became an internal auditor and just had a very steady job and performed very well in that job.

1 (4m 2s):
And your mom was sort of the manager of the household when you were growing up.

3 (4m 8s):
My mother was the CEO of the household. Idea's a better name because she'd run around doing so many things at the same time while keeping music going and singing along with it, no task was too difficult for her. And that was my mother.

1 (4m 25s):
Can you describe sort of how your parents interacted with you? I mean, were they very strict today? Presumably they had high expectations for you and your siblings, but were they sensitive, empathetic or they standoffish? W w w what were they like when you were a kid

3 (4m 46s):
Sensitive? That word didn't exist? I think the times that we were growing up and the society and the, you know, Saturn in Roman culture that I grew up in the emphasis was on education. As long as you studied and got good grades, you were okay if you didn't, everybody came down upon you like a ton of bricks in my family, really the head of the family was my grandfather, my paternal grandfather. He was a retired judge, very firm man, when he spoke, nobody else spoke. And if he said something, nobody did question what he said. The wonderful thing about my grandfather was that he believed that women and men should be treated equally, given all the chances and nobody should be held back from pursuing their dreams and that, you know, philosophy permeated through the whole family.

3 (5m 40s):
My father was that way too. And he believed that whether it was daughters or sons, I didn't matter. The children should be allowed to dream. And we should enable all their dreams as long as it related to education. If it's about going and having a good time in a potty or a restaurant that was non not allowed. As long as you wanted to take more courses, study languages, do stuff related to schoolwork. That's all great. My mother was a bit of a disciplinarian, but she was sort of a study in contrasts because she had one foot on the brake and one foot in the accelerator. I think the fact that she didn't go to college and she couldn't realize her dreams made her, want us to do all the things she couldn't.

3 (6m 27s):
So she had her foot on the accelerator when it came to encouraging her daughters to do whatever they wanted to do. And she gave us the confidence to dream. At the same time, the society around us said, girls should be treated differently than the boys. And so she had a foot on the brake and she always had to apply the brake and the accelerator judiciously. So she allowed us to fly at the same time. Hey, be careful. I'm going to give you a frame. You have freedom within the frame. Don't push the frame too much because that'll break the family.

1 (7m 6s):
You mentioned that the Brahman culture that, that you grew up in which of course is sort of traditionally the, the, the class of priests and intellectuals and, and teachers and in India was achievement. Absolutely. You know, paramount at home. Was that considered something to be very, very important.

3 (7m 26s):
That was almost considered the right to exist in a way, because you know exactly as you put it as priests, as sometimes doctors, but teachers, people of that and administrators, a lot of dramas with the administrators, accountants, you know, the, the expectation was that you would study, you would uphold your a group's expectations of you. You remember Brahmins those days were not welting, but we will learn it. We had education. All of us, we lived kind of, sort of comfortably as a group, but we were not wealthy as such.

3 (8m 7s):
We were comfortable. And so I think the best example would be when parents and relatives got together of all the cousins. The first thing they would talk about is the report card of their kids. What did your kid get in math? My kid got a 98 and were devastated, or my daughter got a hundred. Did you get her help? How did she get a hundred? Everybody would talk about that. But I thought life was much more than just being a bookish person. I love to climb trees. I love to play cricket. I love to learn languages. I just love to do everything in addition to school. And so I was a good student, but I didn't focus on being a great student.

3 (8m 52s):
Like my sister did

1 (8m 54s):
Really into debate as well.

3 (8m 56s):
I love debating. Debating helped you build your skills in terms of communication, confidence, being able to research topics, and you know, whether you given the opportunity to speak for or against the topic you had to develop a point of view. And my ability to communicate, frame an argument, be pithy, argue it out, get on stage and be confident. All of that came from my debating days. And I would encourage everybody to look into that as a building block discipline,

1 (9m 31s):
<inaudible> you write about something that happened when you were a teenager? I think it was in 1968. Your father was involved in a pretty serious car accident and, and spent many months in recovery. And during that time, it forced your family to really burn through, to, to your savings and, and, and put you in a financially precarious position as a family. And you, you read about how that kind of made you start to think about how you as a woman needed to think about providing for yourself and, and, and securing your own future.

1 (10m 14s):
Do you remember thinking about those things at the time?

3 (10m 18s):
So to be honest, we went through that whole incident as a nightmare because to see my beloved father, I mean, my father and I were thick as thieves because I was a favorite child for my father. And, you know, he, he would take me along wherever he went and I'd simply adored him and to watch him and that stayed at home in bed, struggling to walk in those days, there was no physical therapy. There were the hospitals. So everything, my mother was doing everything with my dad besides running the household in retrospect, had my dad not been able to come back to work for whatever reason, what would have happened to the family, how would we have lived, you know, what would be our education?

1 (11m 7s):
It's, it's remarkable because, you know, oftentimes we reflect on, on how our lives turned out based on things that happened to us early, earlier in life. And we can't fully understand them at the time, but clearly, I mean, it, you know, that experience is connected to so much of what happened to you and the decisions you made over the rest of your life.

3 (11m 34s):
Let's try it. You know, it, it sort of takes a place and the deep recesses of your memory, and it sort of releases certain ideas for you to pursue. You never realize where it's coming from, but it does. And then one fine day, you unlock the whole thing and go, oh my God, this comes back to me vividly. And then, you know, you go through tears, you go through pain for awhile, as you relive those days. And then you realized that, you know, when you have the ability to help make change in society to benefit young family builders or young parents who might be facing unprecedented difficulties, you better do something to help them.

1 (12m 17s):
Clearly, you, you had ambitions to pursue a career. You, you went and received your bachelor's degree and went on to receive an MBA in India. And your dad had worked for the state for the state bank in a management position. Was it your, you went to the Indian Institute of management in Calcutta. D was it your ambition to sort of pursue a path of management, kind of like your dad in India? Was that what you had in mind?

3 (12m 49s):
I actually, all my zest for business and my desire to go to, I am Calcutta to my sister because she's the one who set the stage by applying and getting into I am I'm the bad. And once she did, it was inevitable that I applied to business school too, because the two of us were a year apart and we were fiercely competitive. We were very close, but fiercely competitive. And once she'd gone down the bar then went off to him about the study of business. I had no choice because had I not gone to Calcutta, I would have been viewed as, oh my gosh, he's a failed sibling.

1 (13m 30s):
So you, you get your, your MBA in 1976. And, and I think the first, your sort of first job out of, of, of that degree was for a textile firm. That's right. Based in India, was it? And it was called mentor, beard sell that's right. And your, you were a salesperson, you were like a door to door with an MBA. You were like doing door to door sales, right?

3 (13m 59s):
Okay. Well, this is the beauty of training and entry levels in those days. In those days, if you graduated from business school, every business school graduate went through six to nine months of a trainee program. You did not start in behind a desk. You started as a trainee, you learn the frontline job. You read on the factory floor, you were selling, or you were doing something else that related to generating business for the company at the very basic level, because the belief was just because you're a management graduate. You don't, you don't get to start in the office and Lord over people.

3 (14m 42s):
So my first job was selling thread door to door in Bombay. And then when I was moved to madrasa the textile division, I went out there to the wholesalers and retailers selling printed fabrics. And believe me, I loved it guy. I truly, really loved it. Yeah.

1 (14m 59s):
Going door to door, knocking on doors, hearing people say, not interested, no moving on to the next one, maybe getting one sale out of a hundred knocks.

3 (15m 9s):
The difference is that it's not door to door and houses is door to door with wholesalers door to door with retailers. And I was the first woman doing this. So I was a novelty in most of these places, right? There'd be a street full of wholesalers. You know, people sitting in a store with bales and bales of fabric and retailers would come to these wholesalers and buy, you know, two veils of pink, three bales of a certain print that this wholesaler was carrying. So these are wholesale textile dealers. When I entered the street with my salesman, the first store I'd start talking, the guy would bring out the sweets and the coffee to drink. Pretty soon, everybody in the street knows that Madam is here and then everybody's getting ready with a better suite or a better cup of coffee or a better drink.

3 (15m 58s):
So that I come into the store and actually feel great about having been there. And so I was welcomed. I was respected and people just loved the fact that I truly cared about their business because I just didn't talk business. I'd ask them about their families. Usually the wives or daughters came out and wanted to chat with me. Some wives even started to send horoscopes of potential boys. I could marry to my parents. So I went through all that, but put it this way. I was embraced by the wholesalers and the retailers. And I learned the business through their eyes.

1 (16m 38s):
You were, you were, I think around 1977, there was a labor strike that, that kind of shut down production for awhile. And, and around that time, you moved to Johnson and Johnson in, in Bombay around that time, this is the late seventies. This was really around the time you begin to kind of think about moving to the United States. So what was the, what was the impetus? What was the push that, that got you to, to take that leap? Because it's, I mean, a lot of people don't realize how, how much courage it takes for a person to leave everything.

1 (17m 20s):
They know their country, their family, their culture, their neighborhoods, their friends, and to, and to go across the world, especially at that time, 19 77, 78, I mean, the distances were fast and different. No internet, the long distance calling letters that took two, three weeks it's it takes a lot of courage to do that. What was the, what was the spark that gave you the courage to finally make that decision?

3 (17m 50s):
Well, this is the attraction of the United States that you just sort of summarized in the few words that you are now guy, because in India, at that time, the us was the global seat of innovation, the global source of culture, music, art, everything about the U S as far as we were seeing was exciting. People who went to the U S at that time felt they could contribute in profound ways. They felt that they could actually thrive in this new country. And all of those friends of mine had gone to the U S would constantly call and say, look, knowing the kind of person you are, you're the, you're the kind that pushes boundaries, a bit of a go getter.

3 (18m 32s):
You will actually thrive in this environment. And my answer would be exactly what you said. It's so far away and away from my family. How am I going to do this? Remember, I wasn't fleeing persecution or anything. This is a real, I mean, I was having a good life, but their point to me was we are here for you. All of your friends, who you knew in madrasa, we are in the different universities in the United States. We're there as a support system. And, you know, when I discussed it, my parents, they dismissed it saying, you're not going to get in. We can't afford to pay for you. So don't even think about it. But then when I wrote the GMAT, and then I applied to the Yale school of management and got in, and then I got know, combination of loans and scholarship and financial aid to attend Yale, all of a sudden, the fear set in and how are we going to send her away.

3 (19m 27s):
So at that point, when I must have all the courage I could, because mentally I'd already crossed the ocean. And the pole of the U S was just a little too much for me at that time, because I was excited. I was scared, but I was just full of excitement about what the future was going to bring, because everything I dread, what I'd seen in Johnson and Johnson as an American, multi-national the way American business did its business in India. I looked at all of this and said, this is what I want to learn. And be a part of

1 (20m 5s):
You get to, to new Haven, to Yale in 1978. What was your impression? I mean, did you feel like a fish out of water? Did you feel comfortable? Was it easy for you to fit in or did that, did that pose to be a challenge?

3 (20m 22s):
The first month was hell real hell, because you know, you land in JFK and for a person coming from India where the international airports weren't even really developed in those days where the international airport maybe had three gates, and there were more people sending you off and there were passengers. So, and you come from that environment in landed JFK, none of the chaos that you see in Indian airports, none of the sounds, everything is orderly. The airport looks clean. The immigration line works beautifully. Then you get into this bus called the Connecticut limousine, which takes you to new Haven.

3 (21m 6s):
You're motoring through organized traffic, no animals on the road. I look at all this and I go, wow, this is unbelievable. Everything is so clean. And there's actually lines on the road where the traffic follows these rules and regulations. How is that possible? So I'm now I'm like a kid in a candy store. I'm just, I'm my jaws dropping, looking at all this. Then I, Landon Gale, the majesty of the university is breathtaking. But in those days, he'll did not have a support structure for international students. They had an office of international students that processed you into the university, but then you were sink or swim.

3 (21m 48s):
Now, all of a sudden our suitcases, those days didn't even have wheels guy. That's a new adventure. So I'm there with this gigantic suitcase. That's filled to the brim with all the wrong stuff and a Warner bag that I'm carrying no backpack. And I have to carry six blocks over to my dorm that I know nothing about. And they tell me, go east on this street and turn, I don't know where Eastern west is over there. So this was like a new language, a new approach. Then I get to hall of graduate studies, this huge imposing dorm, quiet. Nobody did hello.

3 (22m 28s):
I mean, you could hear a pin drop. I go to my room and I am ready to take the next plane back because there's nobody to talk to. I'm hungry, hungry, hungry. Like you won't believe it. There's nothing in the room except a bed and a chair. And I have to put on sheets and things like that and figure out how to get some food. And so the first, first week was really, really heartbreaking. The second, third and fourth week were okay after that, it was like, wow. My glad I came here.

1 (23m 11s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Indra Nooyi graduated Yale with a ton of ambition and a mountain of student loans and quickly became one of the most sought after executives in the country, stay with us. I'm guy Roz, and you're listening to wisdom from the top. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Discover, discover matches all the cashback. You aren't on your credit card at the end of your first year, automatically with no limit on how much you can earn. It's amazing of all the places where discover is accepted. 99% of places in the U S that take credit cards.

1 (23m 52s):
So when it comes to discover, get used to hearing, yes, more often learn more at discover.com/match. 2021 Nelson report limitations apply. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Don Julio, tequila, Don Julio Gonzalez, didn't just farm a Garvey. He worshiped them. He harvested each Gavi individually plant by plant only handpicking. The Agava at optimum maturity and his legacy lives on today through his exceptional tequila, Don Julio, a life devoted to tequila making, please drink responsibly Don Julio tequila, 40% alcohol by volume, copyright 2021 imported by Diaggio Americas, New York, New York.

1 (24m 37s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Oliver Wyman, believing business success is a series of small decisions. Punctuated by breakthrough moments, learn how their expertise, creativity, and diversity creates breakthroughs for the world's leading companies@oliverwyman.com. Hey, welcome back to wisdom from the top I'm guy Roz. So by the late 1970s, Indra Nooyi had packed up her life in India and moved across the world for the chance to go to the Yale school of management. It was a bold move, especially because at the time there were not a lot of people that looked like her in corporate America.

1 (25m 19s):
I read that when you are one of your first internships, summer internships, while a student at Yale was with Booz Allen Hamilton, the consulting, the management consulting firm, you would come into work everyday in a sari, because that was who you were. That was, you were being authentic to yourself. And, but it, but it was also very different, right? Because people were not many people had never seen that before.

3 (25m 46s):
Well, actually give Booz Allen Hamilton of those days, a lot of credit, because I was the only one in the, sorry, I think in the entire system. And I was wearing a, sorry to say, I was being authentic would be a little bit of an overstatement guy. I'd say that I desperately wanted to fit in, but I didn't have the money to fit in. And when I did try, I had a dreadful experience because I bought the wrong clothes that didn't fit well. And I looked like a freak of nature, but I also realized that there was not one day that Booz Allen made me feel different or unwanted. So I have a lot to thank Booz Allen Hamilton for

1 (26m 25s):
When you, when you finished, when he graduated and you, you began your career because your first child was, was at Boston consulting group was, I mean, did you, could you have imagined at the time, you know, in your graduating class, at, at Yale, and when you started working at BCG, would you have imagined, or could you have imagined that you would one day be running one of the 50 biggest us companies? I mean, one of the biggest companies in the world at that time would, do you think you would have said that about yourself or people to sit around you like, oh, that's Indra, watch her. She is going to be, you know, one of the most successful CEOs one day,

3 (27m 5s):
You know, what's interesting. When I was in my first year at Yale, people just looked at me as an auditing, bright when she speaks, she says the right things, but boy, these international students speak, we are in the dress weird. So we were viewed as, you know, nice people, but really don't belong in the second year because of my Booz Allen Hamilton credentials, I was looked at a little bit more respect and people said, you know, she's more than smart. She got into consulting and she did well, and she's got another offer in consulting. So she must be pretty good. And so there was new found respect for me, but give me a break, being a CEO of a company, I'll be honest with your guy.

3 (27m 49s):
Even the week before I was appointed CEO of PepsiCo. I didn't know I was going to be CEO of PepsiCo. So, no, I mean, if I told you that when I was born, I knew I was going to be CEO. I mean, now this was just one of the most improbable trajectories.

1 (28m 6s):
It sounds like when you thought about yourself and who you were at the time, you weren't thinking I'm going to do something enormous one day.

3 (28m 14s):
No, because you know, my husband, Roger and I got married in 1980, the year I graduated from Yale and we both had nothing. We were starting from zero. And so all that we are focused on is how do we pay off a student loan, right? Because the fact that I had a student loan and I owed that money made me feel very uncomfortable. So any money we had, we first tried to pay as much as we can towards the student loan. We always saved a little bit because we believed savings was important. And then we live life for the rest of the money and it wasn't about clothes. It wasn't about having a good time. It was just about living life within our means.

3 (28m 57s):
And we balanced our checkbook every week. I mean, we were meticulous in how we manage life. And at that time you don't think about bigger and bigger jobs. You think about holding onto the job. You have doing a phenomenal job in our respective jobs. Both of us were working and figuring out how to make sure that as a it's interesting, and I'm not going to use words that I hope don't come out wrong. I felt that I was at that time, a guest in the country as did my husband. And we felt we had to earn our way to be a citizen of the country. So we worked very hard at that.

1 (29m 39s):
You pretty early in your queue, you'd move Chicago to Chicago to work for BCG and your husband, Raj was getting his degree at the university of Chicago. And, and I think at the time your mom, mom eventually came to live with you and your husband in Chicago. Your daughter was born on a lot. What's going on in your life at the time. What do you, what do you remember about that time? I mean, you were presumed, you were traveling a lot as a consultant. Was it? I mean, it sounds like there was a lot happening, a lot to, to kind of handle well, you know,

3 (30m 11s):
When I became a consultant, my husband and I sat down and talked consulting those days, especially in Chicago, all your clients were in different parts of the Midwest and without internet, without FaceTime, without any of that technology, you had to rely on long distance calls in the night with your at and T card. And you couldn't connect otherwise with your spouse. And so, you know, I was gone for three, four days at a time, but we both had an understanding that we both were going to work hard to make some money. So we could save some for our own future. If something went wrong, we never had to worry about how the other one would manage as a, for both our sakes.

3 (30m 57s):
We said, we need to have savings. We need to pay off our loans. And we always wanted a family. And, you know, when we had kids, we wanted to make sure that they would be comfortable and they could do whatever they wanted to. And we just worked towards that. So there was a constant reinforcement of our relationship because we talked about what we both were doing.

1 (31m 21s):
It seems, this is, it's very strange to even say this, but it seems like fate intervened in your life twice in, in similar ways in both were car accidents. The first time of course, was your fathers. When you were a young girl, second time was, was, was your own in 1986, that was a pretty severe accident. But I, it sounds like that also prompted you to make some, some different life decisions about the way you want it to live your life.

3 (31m 53s):
You know, it was tough leaving consulting, but at that point with the accident with the two year old daughter, at that time, I realized that being away from home constantly, even though my mother was not living with me and helping care for my daughter, I was just not going to work because first I was on a Walker and crutches for a good six months and the prognosis wasn't great. And I realized that traveling was not an option. And then Motorola came calling at that time. So combination of factors made me sit back and say, it's time to hang up my boots and consulting the best decision I made fate intervened, the best decision I made going to work in Motorola.

1 (32m 38s):
And really this was the kind of the first in a series of steps you took that was based around your family, that was based around wanting to be closer to your home, your, your kids and that, that begins as kind of real sort of career trajectory working in, in the corporate world. What, what do you remember about that time? Working from a Rola,

3 (33m 4s):
You know, Motorola at that time was just a fine, fine, fine technology company. I was writing the rules on a wireless communication was leading in pages and two-way radio. And the cell phone was first launched by Motorola. And it was just a company, you know, huge in semiconductors government electronics. It was a very, very exciting company. Hmm.

1 (33m 29s):
I know injure that you spent the next few years working in the kind of the corporate tech world for Motorola. And then he moved over to a company called ABB, which is a, some sort of international tech and electronics company. And you, you actually became a senior vice president there, and you've written about some, some key mentors who helped you along the way. But I don't think it's immodest to say that, that you did phenomenally well at these companies. I mean, so well that, that you started to get noticed by a lot of other big companies, including GE and they, from, from what you write, they really wanted to hire you. But how did, how did Pepsi come on your radar?

3 (34m 12s):
Well, one fine day, a head hunter calls and says, will you talk to PepsiCo? I got PepsiCo. They own KFC and taco bell and pizza hut, and I don't even eat meat. What are you talking about? They go, well, you know, it's a very useful company, a fantastic company, and this is hell of a job and you've got to talk to them. So I came in and I, my first interview was with the person who had the job as head of strategy. And he was moving on to a big business leadership job. And after an hour with me, he said, you're not going to meet Bob. Dettmer the CFO. And I'm going to guarantee you. And he won't get long. I said, oh, that's a great introduction.

3 (34m 53s):
I said, why not? He said, because you both are so different. He said, Bob Dettmer is your quintessential new England wasp. And you are just not that you guys are not going to get along. I said, it's too late. I'm yours. I'll go see him. What a

1 (35m 10s):
Strange thing to say. Well,

3 (35m 12s):
I heard a lot of strange things at that time. So I went to see Bob Dettmer and the one hour interview is trash to one and a half hours stretched to two hours. We both struggled to end to end the interview because we got along. So famously. I mean, Bob Dettmer was fantastic. Not only did he charm me about PepsiCo, we started to map out ways we could work together to make the company even better. He made me feel welcome. He and his wife embraced Raj at me and basically said, even if you choose not to come to PepsiCo, we're going to remain very close friends. And then I went to see Wayne Calloway. The CEO, Wayne is a remarkably quiet guy, just a beautiful human being.

3 (35m 58s):
But in my 60 minute interview with him, I must have spoken for 57 or 59 minutes. Not because I wanted to talk, let me assure you, because Wayne has a habit of throwing one line and then waiting for you to talk and then talk again, because he's not saying much. That was just mean. And then, you know, the conversation ended and I met a couple of other executives and I said, you know what, let me go home and think about GE or PepsiCo. And I told both companies, I'd give them an answer on a Wednesday or something like that. And then I get this most amazing call at ABB.

3 (36m 39s):
And my secretary picks up and she says, intro, somebody called Wayne Calloway is on the line. Or somebody called Wayne cattleman. Let me pick up the phone. And I say, yes. When you know, we start talking and then he's talking now for five minutes, which you know, is an unusual amount of time for him. And he ends by saying, you know, I just came out of the G board meeting because Wayne was on Jack's board. And he said, Jack indicated to us that you're likely to join GE.

1 (37m 9s):
And this is Jack Welch. Yep.

3 (37m 11s):
And then he said, GE is a great company. And I can understand why you'd want to join them.

1 (37m 17s):
GE at that time was the hottest company on the planet. I'm Jack Welch was the hottest CEO in the world at the time.

3 (37m 25s):
Totally. And so Wayne goes, I can understand why you'd want to join GE and Jack and I would too, if I were you. But he said, let me make PepsiCo's case one last time, because you said, you'd make a decision on Wednesday and today's Monday. He said, I'm going to assume you still haven't made the decision. So I want to make my case. And he said, my case is simple. We don't have somebody like you and our executive ranks. I need somebody to come in here that has a global perspective, that things differently with the viewpoint of other industries and help PepsiCo get to a different place. And he said, I commit to supporting you, developing you and making sure you're successful in PepsiCo.

3 (38m 8s):
And all that I ask you is give us a chance. That level of humility and outreach touched me, enormously guy. And I tell you what I did. I drove over to PepsiCo and I said, I accept your job.

1 (38m 22s):
Wow. I mean, amazing because everything would have indicated that GE was a natural fit. That that's those, the industries you'd come from you'd experience in those areas, they were recruiting you hard. GE was such a hot company. I mean, Jack Welch was writing best sellers. And everybody knew who he was. People didn't know who the CEO of Pepsi was at the time. I mean, that, that, that, that was almost like a counterintuitive move. But it was that call that pushed you over the edge.

3 (38m 54s):
I will say something. This also made me realize that you can draw all kinds of matrices on companies and criteria to decide which company you should join. In fact, I had a piece of paper that said Monsanto GE PepsiCo criteria, and I was giving ratings of scale one to five and all of that you can do. But at the end of the day, it's in your gut. What you think makes sense for you

1 (39m 23s):
In a moment, how Indra rose up the ranks at Pepsi to become CEO, despite plenty of naysayers stay with us. I'm guy Raz, and you're listening to wisdom from the top. This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up a productivity platform. That's saving people one day every week. How it's simple, click up, brings all of your work into one place. You get tasks, docs, goals, chat, and more in one tool. So you can focus on getting work done without switching apps. It's how teams and companies like Uber, Google and web flow save time.

1 (40m 6s):
Click up is for free for forever. So try click up today at <inaudible> dot com slash NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Intuit, QuickBooks live as a small business owner. You do everything yourself, but now you don't have to introducing a major advancement in small business bookkeeping, having someone else do your books for you, right from your laptop into it. QuickBooks live connects you with trusted experts who understand your business, guaranteeing your books get done, right? So do the best thing you can for your business. By letting QuickBooks, take bookkeeping off your plate, learn more@quickbooks.com.

1 (40m 54s):
Hey, welcome back to wisdom from the top I'm guy Roz. So in 1994, Indra Nooyi was recruited by PepsiCo CEO, Wayne Calloway to join the company as a senior VP of strategic planning. And from an outsider's perspective, it might've seemed like an unusual move. After all she'd been working in technology and electronics for more than 10 years, and here she was moving to an industry she'd never worked in.

3 (41m 22s):
I didn't know the restaurant business one bit. And you know, interestingly, I did tell that to Wayne. You know, when I talked to him, I said, Ben, I don't know the restaurant business. And to me, you get deep into the business when you stop. I'm not even a, meat-eaters a house is going to work with me and taco bell and KFC pizza I can get by his point is I'm not hiring you to formulate products. I'm not hiring you to taste the products. I'm hiring you for a strategy position to help us think where PepsiCo to be going globally. He was right.

1 (41m 59s):
All right. So you join PepsiCo. And presumably the first two years, or the first, at least year, you kind of spend time digging into the business, trying to understand all parts of the business.

3 (42m 12s):
To me, it doesn't matter how senior you are. If you don't spend the time learning the nuts and bolts of the business, you're actually not doing a great job for the company. And I honestly believe that every point in time, I had to zoom in to learn the details of the business and then zoom out to understand what the implications of, you know, your actions could be on the day-to-day operations of the business. So I was constantly zooming in and zooming out. So I spent the first, I would say six to nine months learning the nuts and bolts of each of the businesses.

1 (42m 47s):
When you, I mean, you were sort of tasked with leading bleeding strategy from, from the beginning, and that's a huge responsibility, right? I mean, so, so how do you, you know, how did you approach it at the beginning? I mean, you, you mentioned obviously diving into the business and, and, and really kind of educating yourself about all the different aspects of the business, but, but did you also spend the first sort of year or two kind of listening before you set out a plan or, or were you kind of expected to deliver a plan fairly quickly?

3 (43m 25s):
I had a big benefit in my first year one, Roger and Rico returned to the company and he was running restaurants. And so I was working with him directly. So I was providing the strategic perspective, but Roger was providing the implementation, the practical perspectives, how to make it work at PepsiCo. So I kept my ears open and I learned as much as I could from Roger. But then this is where the BCG experience comes in. And it's invaluable because if you really think about consulting, what consulting does for you is provide you a way to approach an industry and understand the strategic levels of that industry and then that company.

3 (44m 7s):
So it doesn't matter which industry or which company you're thrown into. You know how to look for what drives competitive advantage, what drives Peter profitability, what drives success. And once you approach PepsiCo that way you learn the fundamentals of the business at a 15,000 feet very, very quickly. And then you start tinkering at the implementation level. How do we land this? If, for example, in restaurants, you know, same-store sales growth is a critical driver of profitability. How do you drive same-store sales growth? So now you go to the restaurants and figure out why is it your same store? Sales has not grown.

3 (44m 48s):
So you take the value drivers, then you land them into each business to understand why they're working or not working. So it's all of the entire set of experiences I had before PepsiCo, I could now apply and deploy at PepsiCo.

1 (45m 6s):
You write that about two years in you actually for time considered leaving PepsiCo. This is, this is a during Roger and Rico's tenure as CEO. And you, you had felt some tension with colleagues around, around metrics around your role and w w what was going on.

3 (45m 27s):
Well, you know, I was in corporate and corporate is always a bad word in most companies. And the people before me were very, very qualified people who had the job before me, but they also tended to be hands-off from the divisional heads. I wasn't intending to interfere in what the division presidents were doing, but if I felt that something was not okay in terms of the target was too high or too low, or I thought they were going to miss their forecasts, I spoke up, you couldn't just have me be a paper pusher, right? So I'd say, well, I'll tell you what guys you say, you're going to grow 10. I ran all the models we do at corporate.

3 (46m 9s):
I don't see you're growing at 10. And they'd say, who are you to second? Guess us, I'm not second guessing you, I'm just telling you what the model saves. So don't question me question the models. And so there were a couple of people in the senior management ranks that would sort of destroy me at every division presidents meeting, where they would be rude. They would say things like corporate planning is trying to run a company. We're destroying the culture of this company. And when Roger was CEO, he would just listen, do nothing about it. And I put up with it for a while, and then I said, okay, I've just finished this massive piece of work on restaurant strategy, which I'm going to present to the board. I'm going to present to the board and I've had it.

3 (46m 51s):
I'm just going to walk out because I can't take this anymore. I was not afraid about walking out. So when I walked into Roger's office and said, guess what, Roger, the presentation is done. We're going to share it with the boat tomorrow, but I got news for you. After the board presentation, I'm walking out and it's been wonderful working at PepsiCo. I'm not expecting anything. I don't want severance. I don't want to anything. I'm just leaving. Wow. He just looked at me as pencils started twiddle on that table. And he just gave me that look. And he said, I'll talk to you later. He was furious. And he knew exactly why I told him why I was leaving too. And the division presidents meeting that was supposed to start in the afternoon, the meeting that typically attack me all the time.

3 (47m 35s):
A couple of people was delayed by several hours. And Roger, I guess, had a chat with all of them. Then when the meeting actually started, it was a love Fest, absolute love Fest. And the next day I presented to the board and then Roger came to me after the board meeting and said, we're all in business. Let's get onto the next steps. I just looked at him and said, what next steps? He said, the next steps. You're just in charge of all the next steps. All of the subjects are closed. And he just walked away.

1 (48m 6s):
Wow. I mean, he basically read them the riot act.

3 (48m 9s):
That's what he did.

1 (48m 11s):
It's really interesting because it, it sounds like the decision you made, wasn't like this sort of strategic power play. You were just, you were, you just said, you know what? I don't need this in my life. And that's, you walked in and you said, Hey, this is great. Enjoyed it. I'm going to carry this project out. And then I'm, I'm going to step down. It's clear that, you know, there are people who don't want me around and, and, and he either was not aware of this or was not willing to do anything about it, but you were, you were too important for him to let that happen.

3 (48m 48s):
You know, he knew exactly what was happening because it happened in London when we were at a meeting and I just walked out right after I finished my presentation. I just,

1 (48m 56s):
You were just treated with disrespect. Like, it seems so weird. I mean, these are colleagues. Like, I mean, I guess in the context of today, we think of it differently. This is now in the, in the mid nineties and, and, and corporate culture was, it was different even back then.

3 (49m 10s):
And I was the only woman in the room to be honest. And I was surprised that a couple of, I wouldn't say all, I shouldn't define all of PepsiCo by a couple, a couple of people were downright, you know, just not okay. And I felt Roger could have put them in their place, but he didn't. And so I told him, I said, not only are they constantly attacking me, you don't put them in their place. And his point was, you always have to tennis skin. And I told him that you you're oblivious to what's going on. And so if you're not sensitive to how I feel shame on you. So I'm just telling you thin skin, thin skin I'm leaving.

1 (49m 49s):
Wow. But when you made that decision to say that it actually by kind of standing up for yourself and, and taking a stand and saying, look, I'm not going to take it, but I'm not going to fight you. I, this is great. And I'll take my, you know, my, my work somewhere else that actually cleared a path for you to do the work that you needed

3 (50m 13s):
Most certainly because it, it actually, it was like a light bulb had gone off and I've never looked back from that day.

1 (50m 22s):
Wow. All right. So you would go on to kind of guide some, some really big decisions that, that, that Pepsi took over the course of the next 10 years to divesting from the restaurants pizza at KFC taco bell and a big move, which was buying Tropicana in 1998. And I think at the time there was a lot of internal opposition to that decision to find Tropicana because it was expensive and people were like orange juice, but it turned out to be a hugely important equity.

3 (50m 56s):
You know, again, all of these acquisitions were made with a very strategic framework in mind, the strategic framework being we needed to future proof, this company, we needed to make sure that every day part was covered. And so all these acquisitions we made to transform the company were huge. And in the DMCA, in the case of the restaurant business, it wasn't really a divestiture of restaurants. As much as we were unfettered the restaurants from the packaged goods culture, because restaurants were a service business, the PepsiCo was a packaged goods culture. And so we unfettered the restaurants from the packaged goods culture. That was, you know, the big move, but the right move,

1 (51m 39s):
Another acquisition quake roads, which included Gatorade, which dominated, and probably still does the S the sports drink category I'm curious was at that time. And maybe even to this day, we are, were, and are a lot of decisions made by Pepsi driven by its competition with Coca-Cola,

3 (52m 3s):
You know, beverages are only about 45, 50% of the company. So I think,

1 (52m 10s):
Cause it's snack foods, right? Lays and Fritos and Doritos.

3 (52m 13s):
Yeah. Three justice, DDoS Cheetos. I mean, amazing products. I think that because all the analysts who cover us at a beverage analyst, they tend to put us into the Coke versus Pepsi, you know, frame in reality, Pepsi was like a camp is a company like no other, because we had a very different portfolio than a beverage competitor. But if you took Pepsi out of the beverage universe, these beverage analyst won't have anybody to cover. So that's the challenge. And also business schools thrive on a Coke versus Pepsi, competitive competition case. Yeah. They still teach it as if it's still a current competition of two beverage behemoths, which is really not the case, but that's okay.

3 (53m 1s):
It makes for good reading and good commercials and good everything else.

1 (53m 5s):
It is remarkable that, I mean, Coca-Cola is in Pepsi are obviously they do different things, but, and Coca-Cola's a, a larger company, but not that much larger than Pepsi.

3 (53m 18s):
Coca-Cola's a larger company in revenues, in beverages as a total revenue, we are much larger. Coca-Cola's capitalization is slightly bigger than ours only because it's a largely franchise company and makes different sort of returns versus PepsiCo, which is also manufacturing company. So PepsiCo is a more, I said, diversified company with a very steady future because, you know, we're not dependent on food service or restaurant business to grow. We can grow in breakfast items like Quaker. We can grow in Frito-Lay. We can grow in beverages of all kinds carbonated and non-carbonated on namesake brand.

3 (54m 2s):
Pepsi is only 15% of our revenue for the other company. The namesake brand is a huge percentage of the revenue. More like 50 or 60%

1 (54m 12s):
Injury. In 2006, you were named CEO of PepsiCo. When, when Steve Reinemund stepped down, you mentioned to me earlier in this interview, that, that a week before that happened, you would not have imagined that that that would be the case. But I mean, you must've had some inkling that you were among those being considered,

3 (54m 36s):
You know, it's interesting, and this may be a surprise to most people. There was no point that, you know, all the potential candidates were told that there was going to be a CEO succession because Steve was still young and we were having a great time working together. And so the fact that the board was contemplating succession, because Steve wanted to step down was a big surprise to us. And we were never called in to present our blueprint for the company because Mike White and I, who are both on the board at PepsiCo and would make presentations to the board regularly, the board knew us. We were known commodities, but we were not, not asked to appear in front of the board and lay out our future plans for the company.

3 (55m 22s):
And you know, whether the two of us could work together, nobody asked us those questions. And so when Steve walked into my home on a Monday morning and said on Saturday, the board is going to meet and vote you in as a CEO and I'm stepping down, I'm like, whoa, what for, why are you doing this? Who was a big shock? It was a shock for Mike. It was a shock for me.

1 (55m 45s):
I mean, you're 12 years in. So the board knew you, the, you know, obviously that you were known within the company, you had already achieved so much at that point. But when you were named as CEO, you write about how some of the, the reactions from, you know, writers and analysts and in media really kind of got to you, you know, some of the descriptions about you or the, the, the anonymous quotes in articles about you really, you really kind of bothered you and understandably,

3 (56m 26s):
And I can laugh about it. Now, then when they write about this sort of a funny person that walks around bare feet, singing songs to herself,

1 (56m 35s):
And that's where they would write about

3 (56m 38s):
Salaries to work. I know what a salary to work, but doesn't matter. You know, at that time they were painting me as this absolutely exotic person who had come into the boardroom of the state prim and proper PepsiCo, I guess they wanted to draw a major contrast to everybody else out there. I don't care. In retrospect, I laugh it off, but at that time, I'm like, see me, I'm one of these totally conservative people who wears long skirts and jackets and shirts, and always the same kitten heel shoes. And I don't smoke. I don't drink. Give me a break guys, maybe at six o'clock. I kick off my shoes because the heels hurt.

3 (57m 20s):
And maybe when I'm stressed out, I hammer tune, but relax. Don't write about me as this hippy kind of a person, but it didn't matter. You know, they painted me in interesting ways, but to be honest guy, that's all behind me because as the company went on, as my tenure, as CEO went on, you know, there were supporters and detractors, the detractors are usually louder than the supporters, but then as long as the board was behind me, I felt I could do anything, which is what I did.

1 (57m 54s):
You had several big sort of initiatives that you put out while you are a Pepsi. This one was sort of reclassifying the products with, with a, sort of a fun category for the chips and soda, and then a kind of a better category, which was the, the day and the low-fat drinks and low fat foods. And then the good for you. Things like oatmeal and other products, and you, you really push this initiative called performance with a purpose. What, what was, was that initiative about what was the idea behind it?

3 (58m 27s):
This was way back in 2006, and we were beginning to do things to move the portfolio to a healthier mix. Quaker roots was an example of an acquisition that helped us get there. You know, we had bought a naked juice. That was another example. Tropicana was in our portfolio. And so we were making all the right moves to add calcium to Tropicana juice, you know, take sugary drinks out of the vending machines in schools. So there were a lot of actions that we were taking to make the company a better company, if you want to call it that. And future-proof it. But when I became CEO, the environment for companies like ours in the marketplace was very different.

3 (59m 9s):
The talk on obesity was very, very high. There was a big noise about it all over society in every country

1 (59m 16s):
Suing beverage makers. Right,

3 (59m 18s):
Exactly. Right. And, you know, compare countries were threatening taxes, a portion control drinks. I mean, all kinds of noise on our industry. In our industry, there was also a human cry about plastics. You know, how much plastic was being out there still is. It still is, but then it had started. So, and then in many, many countries, we were viewed as a water parasite use too much water. The town doesn't have water to eat or drink, and there's a Pepsi plant or a Coke plant close by using a lot of water. So we had to worry about water. We had to worry about plastics. And then those were also the days where it is very hard to get good people to come and work and traditional consumer products companies, people wanted to know what the purpose in life was.

3 (1h 0m 9s):
Why

1 (1h 0m 9s):
Should they were going to the best people are going to the tech sector,

3 (1h 0m 12s):
Totally tech or someplace else, but there was a new found awareness about purpose and what do we want to do with our jobs? Why should we work at this company and give it all our time? If the company's not going to do something to make the world a better place, there was a

1 (1h 0m 30s):
Consciousness and that's happening. That's happening again now, today.

3 (1h 0m 34s):
And it needs to only, it needs to. And so, because that consciousness had been awoken, you know, to me, the only way to future proof, PepsiCo, to make sure that we would remain successful well into the future was if I could, I found a way for the company to deliver great performance because we'd always about good performance, good financial performance, but figured out how we can transform the portfolio to healthier products. More good for you and better for your products. How do we reduce our environmental footprint? So we reduce our costs and we get a license to operate in societies around the world.

3 (1h 1m 14s):
And then how do we create an environment inside PepsiCo? So people feel they can really come in and feed, like they brought themselves to work. So we worked on every aspect of purpose and performance and put the monies behind sugar reduction, salt production dialing up zero calorie products, making healthier products tastes great and be ubiquitously available. We did a ton of work on water reduction in our plants, how to make thinner bottles, how to think about recycling in a whole different way and what kind of programs they should be offering our employees so that they knew that PepsiCo looked at them as an asset for the company, not a tool of the trade.

3 (1h 2m 3s):
So we changed a lot of things in the company and it did good things for us. Our performance was good over the period. Our retention rates went up. Our attrition rate was way down and PepsiCo is once again, viewed as a phenomenal talent bank for industry as a whole, because we were so filled with outstanding leaders.

1 (1h 2m 26s):
You were during your tenure. I'm often the only, or one of just a few female CEOs of a fortune 500 company. And with that came sort of you as a symbol, a model, an example, all of the things that, that, that tend to happen when somebody is the quote, the only, or one of a few of, of, of a group representing a larger group. And at the same time you from, from what you right, we're kind of roiling internally because of your, on the one hand, you were incredibly successful running Pepsi and, and sort of held up as this amazing model.

1 (1h 3m 21s):
On the other hand, kind of struggling with your own feelings of guilt about the time or the lack of time you had with your family.

3 (1h 3m 32s):
That push and pull is inevitable because every one of the jobs I was doing was a full-time job. Being a CEO was three full-time jobs, being a wife, a mother, I was all full-time jobs. Each one of them being a daughter was a full-time job. And the days till 24 hours, and believe me, I was using that day to its fullest because I didn't sleep much. I learned how to multiplex. I could do three or four things at the same time. So I was going, you know, fast, but there is no way that you can do eat job to a satisfaction level that makes you feel great about it.

3 (1h 4m 13s):
It was a constant juggling act. And that you had to do the juggling maybe three or four times a day, because some priority had to shift something at home, had to get precedents or something you're doing at work. So you go through this juggling and because of this juggling act, you know, you don't feel guilty about work, but you feel guilty about home. Especially my two kids, I'd say my God, when I left home today, they looked at me long English saying, I wish mommy, wasn't going, you know, one of them has got the flu, I'd run home every two hours to just check on them and rush back. And so I sort of wore myself out doing all those things, but deep down inside then Guild gnaws at you.

3 (1h 4m 58s):
But that's par for the course, anybody who thinks it can be done without the guilt means you just decided to give up something completely like motherhood or building a family or whatever. If you want to do a doll is juggling and guilt.

1 (1h 5m 13s):
And let's be honest. I mean, your male counterparts are not asked these questions and, and, and don't exceed the expectations that they might feel any guilt aren't there, right? Like we, is it, I mean, do we expect different things from women CEOs than we do from men CEOs?

3 (1h 5m 39s):
I think we expect different things from women period. You know, we think women are responsible for kids. Women are responsible for families, not true in my case, Roger and I both felt we were responsible for the kids and the family and our future. And so I think it's very, very important. Everybody who has a ideal desire to get married and have kids has a conversation with their spouse about who's going to do what have the honest conversations, because it cannot be done alone. And women in particular have to let go of perfection because very often we, we, women want to be perfect at everything it's in our DNA.

3 (1h 6m 28s):
And you know, at some point you may have to give up things that you wanted to do. They might have to say, you know what, I'm not going to keep the house spotless. I'm just going to let it go because I'm just exhausted. And many of us run ourselves ragged because we want to be viewed as getting everything right. And I think all of that is a formula for failure. So the best thing is for us to have the honest conversations with the spouse, make sure that both are on the same page when it comes to who's going to do what to support the family. In my case, I had an added advantage, a guy, I had my husband's family that unusually decided that they're going to support me, whatever happens.

3 (1h 7m 13s):
So they were my biggest tailwinds. They would call and say, oh, you know, don't quit your job. We're there to help you. And, you know, tell us what kind of help you want. And we'll be so proud of you and what you've accomplished. And so it was not just my husband. I had wonderful in-laws and I think all in-laws have to stop and think about the future and say, if you're going to let the women and men both fly, we have to also lean. And this becomes an intergenerational responsibility.

1 (1h 7m 47s):
<inaudible>, it's, it's amazing because of all the things you accomplished and the fact that you, I mean, where you started life and where you got to, I mean the top of the corporate world, and yet you write that at times in your career, you really felt like you had to downplay your achievements. Hmm. Wow.

3 (1h 8m 11s):
I think that goes back to the crown and the garage comment that my mother made way back in 2000 when I came home and I just wanted to share my big news. And her point was you entered the house and you leave the crown of the garage. I think that we still live in a society where the woman's achievement is downplayed in the men's achievements are elevated. We're making changes, but we still live in that society. I think in our home, you know, the dialogue and discussion was different. My mother grew up at a time when it was that way you played, you know, you play up the men's achievements and you downplay the woman's achievements.

3 (1h 8m 58s):
That's how you keep a harmonious family in my family. Now my husband was celebrate my achievements. Like it's all Nobel prizes that have won. Okay. Just as I would his, we both lift each other up. Maybe that's the future generation, because if we don't do that, then what happens is we basically telling women, we're all going to keep one foot on the brake and one foot on the accelerator and the foot on the brake is going to be a little heavier than the foot on the accelerator, which I don't think is fair.

1 (1h 9m 31s):
When you look at the future of work, you, one of the things you, you, you wrote when you stepped down after 12 years, as CEO of Pepsi record an amazing amount of time. I think the average CEO lasts for four years at companies. Most companies you wrote about how you, you wished you would've spent a little bit more time with family and you encouraged people to think about that in their own careers. And, and you've been more vocal, more and more vocal about that since you've stepped down, running day-to-day operations at Pepsi about, you know, focusing on, on our lives.

1 (1h 10m 11s):
And even, I think I'm paraphrasing to be ready in a lot. Our lives are short. We don't have that much time on this planet and we have to focus on what actually matters. Work is important. Career's important. Achievement is important, but it's only one, one part of our, of our lives.

3 (1h 10m 27s):
I think, you know, I sit on various future of work committees and you know, we talk about how things are going to change post pandemic. And I have to tell you, one of the things that we never talk about in these committee meetings is the whole issue of care who's going to do all the caregiving. How's it going to get done? How are we going to make sure that we have a pathway for highly educated women to also contribute to the economy as much as they are family builders and, you know, help nurture and develop the family. And I really believe that the issue on care is a big blind spot among global leaders.

3 (1h 11m 9s):
And I'm in a missed opportunity. Now, now I speak as an economist, not a feminist, a guy because when I was PepsiCo CEO and I was in the rooms of power with all the men CEOs, we talked about the future of work. As if it's about technology, the world, GDP growth retraining of employees. We never mentioned family and care, and who's going to do the jobs and how are we going to do it in a world where we've got a lot of aging people? My belief is that if there are more women in the room in those groups and rooms of power, this would have come up sooner.

3 (1h 11m 49s):
It's a big missed opportunity. And I think that we have to elevate the discussion from, you know, quiet discussions that don't lead anywhere to make in front of center to say, Hey, with the aging population and with a need to have children and young people to build families at the same time, the best and brightest to be deployed in the service of, you know, furthering the economy. If we don't focus on care as a critical support system for the country, we're not going to have a society. That's happy, we'll have another Japan or South Korea where the birth rate is low and the requirements of jobs and children conflict so much because what's happening is young.

3 (1h 12m 35s):
People are now delaying having kids or choosing not to have kids at all. And if that happens, it's going to debilitate our economic system down the road. And so I think that we should stop framing this as female and say, it's about families and it's not a feminist argument. It's an economist argument.

1 (1h 12m 56s):
When you think about the journey you have taken, and your, your book has really just a terrific, an inspiring story. I mean, to have come from where you came and grown up, where you grew up and not only to come to the U S and, and build a career and a family, but to, to, to get to the highest levels of, of business. Could you ever have imagined that? I mean, D D was there any part of your early life where you could have envisioned that?

3 (1h 13m 32s):
No, because I never thought I'd come to the United States and I will tell you one thing, a guy, I don't believe my story could have been possible in any other country, but the United States. So it's only here that somebody like me can come here, work their tail off, contribute, be acknowledged, promoted, mentor developed, and then ultimately even selected to run such a big iconic American company. So in many ways, I'm a product of my upbringing, my own, you know, drive for better performance and my hard work, et cetera, et cetera. But I'm also a proud product of the many mentors.

3 (1h 14m 15s):
And I'm an extremely proud product of, you know, America, as we know it,

1 (1h 14m 25s):
That's Indra Nooyi, former chairperson and CEO of PepsiCo in 2018. Indra stepped down as CEO. She currently serves on several boards, including the international cricket council. Indra is a huge fan of cricket. She actually helped start the first women's cricket team at mudras Christian college back in India in the early 1970s. Although since moving to the U S in the late seventies, she says she fell in love with something entirely new, the New York Yankees Hey, thanks for listening to the show. This week, the music for this episode was composed and performed by drop electric I'm guy Roz.

1 (1h 15m 10s):
And you've been listening to wisdom from the top from luminary built-in productions and NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor GoDaddy. Now's the time to get your business going because the world's been waiting for what you do. So no matter what you're selling or where it's needed with GoDaddy, you can sell anything anywhere.

5 (1h 15m 39s):
There are millions of books out there just waiting for you, but how to keep up introducing and PRS book of the day. Every weekday, we feature some of our favorite conversations with authors and writers about their latest books. You can check it out in about the time it takes a walk, the dog happy reading.