0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

White Lies (9s):
This is Chip Brantley, co-host of the NPR podcast, white Lives. Before we found the man in Vancouver, before we sued the State Department, before we snuck into the graveyard of a federal penitentiary, all we had were the photographs. Photographs of a group of Cuban men standing on the roof of a prison in rural Alabama. That's this season on the NPR podcast. White Lies.

Sakara (30s):
Could Your Metabolism Music, Kickstarter? Are you having gut issues or just feeling low energy? Well, Sakara is here to help. Sakara started when it's two female founders rejected diet culture and decided to build a brand focusing on holistic health and wellness. Sakara delivers science backed, plant rich nutrition programs and wellness essentials right to your door. They're ready to eat. Meals are nutritionally designed to deliver results from weight management and eased bloat to boosted energy and clearer skin. Recently I tried the Sakara Burger with Chili Cashew Cream. Not only was it delicious and filling, but my entire family loved it too. Right now, Sakara is offering our listeners 20% off their first order when they go to sakara.com/built or enter code B U I L T at checkout. That's sakara, S A K A R a.com/built to get 20% off your first order. sakara.com/built.

Discover (1m 29s):
I just learned discover credit cards do something pretty awesome. At the end of your first year, they automatically double all the cash back you've earned. That's right. Everything you've earned doubled all the cash back from eating at your favorite soup dumpling restaurant. Doubled all the cash back from that trip where you sort of learned to snowboard also doubled. And the best part, you don't have to do anything ridiculous to get it. Nope. Discover does it automatically. Seriously though seat terms and check it out for yourself at discover.com/match.

3 (2m 5s):
We started shipping our first brand new Outsoles, and I got an email from a very sweet woman. So she had put her kit together and gone out for a run, and the the laces had torn through that little hole on the side, and we discovered that a good chunk of the production run, they hadn't packed enough rubber into that part of the mold and they were too thin and they just ripped. And I, I literally sank onto the floor like I thought I was gonna throw up. I was. I was like, we're going bankrupt.

0 (2m 50s):
Welcome to how I Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross, and on the show today, how a five kilometer run in Bare Feet led Steven Sachen and Elena Phoenix to build Zero Shoes, A minimalist shoe brand that's grown into a multimillion dollar business. I used to hate running it always hurt my knees. And then sometime in my early thirties, I tried running in minimalist shoes, specifically those five fingered tow shoes that kinda make you look like a character from Avatar.

0 (3m 36s):
But the effect on me was incredible. And from that moment on, I became an avid runner and I never went back to running shoes with cushioning. Now, before I go on, let me add some caveats here, because there is a lot of noise around whether barefoot running is better for you or worse for you. And I have neither the scientific nor physiological background to weigh in on any of this with authority. But for some people, running with just a thin layer of rubber between your feet and the ground just works. Now, before I go on a bit of clarity around terminology, you will hear me describe these shoes as barefoot and minimalist. And for simplicity, I use them interchangeably.

0 (4m 18s):
But what I'm talking about are shoes with little or no cushioning and just a thin layer of rubber between your foot and the ground. Now to be clear, barefoot or minimalist shoes make up a small fraction of the nearly 110 billion global athletic footwear market. Barefoot shoes account for less than one half of 1% of that market. Still minimalist. Running shoes are growing in popularity every year. And even though many of the big brands like Nike on and New Balance do make minimalist shoes, they're only a handful of brands dedicated entirely to them. And one of the best known is Zero.

0 (4m 59s):
The brand was actually started in 2009. The founders husband and wife team, Steven Sachen and Elena Phoenix scaled it up very slowly. But by 20 22 0 sold nearly 50 million worth of shoes. Anyway, before they founded Zero, Steven and Lena started a bunch of different small businesses. They did internet marketing. Steven created software for screenwriters, they had mortgage businesses, and by the time they reached middle-aged, they had the resources to live a modest no frills life in Boulder, Colorado. And neither Stephen Norlan had any ambitions to get rich. They just didn't wanna work in an office or have a boss.

0 (5m 42s):
Anyway, around age 45, Steven started to get back into sprinting, which is something he hadn't done since high school. And after reading the book Born to Run, he was inspired to make his own rubber running sandals, the kind of sandals worn by indigenous tribes in the mountains of Mexico. Soon enough, Stephen's running buddies started asking him to make them shoes. And within a few months, a business was born. Now, along the way, Stephen and Lena encountered every imaginable right of passage for a business manufacturing meltdowns, difficulty managing inventory, the trade war with China, which drove up tariffs on their shoes, debt, anxious investors, even an appearance on Shark Tank, which ended with an insulting offer, which we will get to a little bit later on.

0 (6m 32s):
For the first part of this interview, you'll hear from Steven, Lena will come in a bit later. Steven Sachen grew up in the sixties and seventies in Bethesda, Maryland. He was a top gymnast in high school and did track and field and he also had a pretty solid business performing magic shows at birthday parties. But by the time he went to college at Duke, he realized he was pretty good at something else, standup comedy.

5 (6m 55s):
They had a comedy competition and they brought three comics down from New York and we did our little competition. And then the three comics did their show. And I won the competition and the three comics came up to me and said, you could be doing this for real, and so

0 (7m 11s):
It could be a standup comic. Yeah.

5 (7m 13s):
And wow, right around that time, that was when the comedy boom had just started. So this is 19 83, 84. Yeah. And a club opened in Raleigh, North Carolina. And I went down there and auditioned and they made me the house mc. So I opened for hundreds of acts and then by the time I graduated, or the guy who booked that club said to me, call me when you're ready to graduate, cuz then I'll give you 10 weeks on the road. Wow. And that 10 weeks turned into 10 months. This

0 (7m 36s):
Is why you were a student at Duke. You were, you were MCing this thing.

5 (7m 39s):
Yeah. Yeah. So student by day, MC at night. Yeah. Basically December of 84, 83, 84, I moved to New York and started working the scene there.

0 (7m 50s):
And so you basically moved to New York as a standup comic? Yeah. And that was what you did for and and, and was that your plan for, for the time being?

5 (8m 1s):
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Once I started doing standup, it was just way too much fun. Cuz you know, you hang out with the funniest people in the world for a few hours. You get on stage for 30 to 45 minutes and have a blast. Except for when it doesn't go very well, which is very entertaining too.

0 (8m 15s):
Did, by the way, when you were performing as a comic, did you, did you ever perform with p people who became famous, who really made it big?

5 (8m 23s):
Oh, one of the reasons that I adore my wife is she puts up with the fact that when we're watching TV on any given evening, I'm going, Hey, I worked with that guy. Hey, that was my roommate. Hey, we hung out. So I open for Jay Leno a couple times. I open for Jerry Seinfeld, Brian Regan, I could literally go down the list if there's a comic who's been doing it for more than 35 years, we work together.

0 (8m 43s):
Hmm. And, and what happened? I mean, what happened to your career? Clearly you had promise and but, but you're, you know, that didn't happen with you. Well,

5 (8m 52s):
Oh boy. So the comedy boom started busting in 92 ish

0 (8m 57s):
And Yeah. And you were still, you were still doing standup pretty much Yeah. Weekly or every couple times a week.

5 (9m 2s):
Oh, oh, like six nights a week. In fact, when I started doing standup for the first couple years, I worked seven nights a week, multiple shows per night often. Wow. And finally, I kind of burned out and someone said, you need to take a break.

0 (9m 14s):
Hmm. But I mean, from what I understand, you, you weren't really taking a break because I think around this time you were also attending Columbia in New, in New York and, and getting a master's degree in screenwriting. Yep. And, and I guess what that, that sort of gave you an idea for a business, which was like making software for writing screenplays. Is, is that right?

5 (9m 36s):
Right. So I realized that there was an interesting way of thinking about a screenplay in terms of the different elements, A scene heading, the action that you see on the screen, a character's name, what the character says, various things. And if you think about typing on a typewriter, there's cues that your motions are giving you the tab and enter key, that if the elements were smart and knew what they were and how they related to other elements and how they related to the page, then you could do all the formatting, all the pation, all this really complex stuff. It was very arcane, automatically on the fly in a way that no one had ever done it.

0 (10m 10s):
And it was called, and this, this, this software that you created was called script wear. How did you do it? I mean, you, how did it come about?

5 (10m 17s):
Well, I met a programmer who worked at PC Magazine at a comedy show one night. And we got together and I talked about my idea and he had just gotten a new piece of software for creating programs that could do what I was talking about. And so we partnered up and started developing this program, which took about three years.

0 (10m 36s):
Wow. So the two of you built this program called Script Ware? Yeah. And, and you were based out of New York?

5 (10m 43s):
Well, once I realized I was gonna be in the software business, not the standup business, I said, Hmm, I don't need to still be in New York. And two months later I was in Boulder, Colorado.

0 (10m 52s):
So you moved to Boulder and that's where you based script ware and how, I mean, how did you finance it?

5 (10m 58s):
I had about 17 credit cards with 0% balance transfer fees. And that also gave you either frequent flyer points or some other bonus even for a balance transfer. So about for six years, I was just shuffling balances from one card to another racking up frequent flyer points, not paying any interest.

0 (11m 15s):
Wow. And, and so, I mean, gimme a sense of this, I mean, this was as, again, like, I can't imagine this is a massive market because there's a limited number of people who are screenwriters. But I mean, was this a, a successful business from a, from a financial standpoint? Was it profitable or was, were you fairly kind of treading water? No,

5 (11m 35s):
No. We were, well, we were doing okay. I think at our peak, we were not a big business. It was a million dollar business. But unfortunately, I discovered something about business that I didn't know, which is when you threaten other people's livelihoods, they don't go, congratulations. You have the better mousetrap and walk away. They will most likely went back into a corner, tried to screw with you before they tried to improve what they're doing. And so after about 10 years, one of my competitors did something de devilishly brilliant to kind of lock me outta the market,

0 (12m 6s):
Which was to make a better product.

5 (12m 8s):
No, talk to the biggest dealer at that time and say, how much margin do we need to give you to not sell script wear? And they had an answer. Hmm. But frankly, in the last two or three years before my competitor pulled the rug off from underneath me, I was just kind of bored. And so, yeah, I was looking for the next thing. And I had gotten into internet marketing at that time. This is again, 92, 93 is when that all began. And so I was spending more time on doing internet marketing, which was much more interesting to me than running a software company.

0 (12m 42s):
What was your, what was your objective, Steven? Were you, I mean, I mean, I, from what I understand, like you were, you know, Boulder's a great place to live, obviously, but it, it sounds like you were doing a bunch of different things to, I don't know, to to to build something bigger, to make a bunch of money and retire. Like, what was your

5 (13m 5s):
Strategy? Yeah, you're, you, you're giving me way too much credit. So I would say that because I was too old to have gotten Ritalin, I just kept doing things that I found interesting, which had me bouncing around from one thing to another pretty often. Yeah. But when I was in high school, I think it was in high school, there was a book that came out called Your Money Or Your Life written by Joe Dominguez and Vicky Robin. The premise being that you wanna track your expenses and track your income, reduce your expenses as much as you can, take the difference between what you're making and what you're spending, and invest that at that time in t-bills. And once you're making enough money from your investments to cover your expenses, then you have financial freedom and

0 (13m 43s):
You can retire and live off the Yeah. And live off the interest or whatever.

5 (13m 47s):
Yeah. And that basically was my goal from the time I was about, I don't know, 16, 17. I really, I, I used to say to my dad, I'd like to be retired by the time I'm 35.

0 (13m 56s):
All right. And so I guess you are around this time you're doing a bunch of different things in Boulder and, and, and you were also doing a TV show, right? Like a, like on a very obscure cable channel called Knowledge tv. And the show, I guess was called Disc Talkers, where you were like, what? It's like car cock for computers?

5 (14m 17s):
Yeah, that's exactly what it was. And, and while it was Knowledge TV was from the Jones Entertainment Network, which had a bunch of different channels. A lot of people didn't really know it, it was on basic cable, very niche thing, but very entertaining.

0 (14m 32s):
This was a show you did with somebody else, co-host, and you would just get, get calls in. I, I watched some of it and most of the calls at the time were like, I've got a this virus and how do I deal with this? And that virus, like,

5 (14m 45s):
Well, we will get to this, but if it weren't for that show and I've got this virus, I would not be married to my

0 (14m 51s):
Wife. Okay. Which, which, which I guess is the perfect segue into bringing your wife Lena into the conversation who's been sitting here quietly, and Lena, I guess before, long before you met Steven in your twenties, you actually had started and then sold a small business, which was a, like a mortgage brokerage in Eugene, Oregon. And, and eventually you end up in Boulder to study dance at Naropa universities, which is I think is a, a Tibetan Buddhist affiliated university. And I guess this was like, what, like 95, 96?

3 (15m 27s):
Right.

0 (15m 27s):
And, and this, and I guess this is when you first met Stephen, and I guess the two of you met in, in Boulder, like through, through friends. Like how, how did, how did the two of you

3 (15m 37s):
Meet? Yeah, so actually a woman that I had met, I ended up becoming housemates with because she was also a student at Naropa and she was friends with Stephen. So she had organized a brunch for some mutual friends we had, and Steven came with his fiance, and that was the first time we met. And I could tell he was interested in me, but his fiance was there. And so that was a do not pass go kind of moment. And she, his fiance also turned out to be a student at Naropa, and I had two classes with her, so they broke up shortly thereafter.

3 (16m 21s):
But she, and she was spending a lot of time processing the relationship and saying all kinds of horrible things about him. So I didn't really, didn't have a very good impression of him.

0 (16m 31s):
And, and I, I, I guess at some point you, Elena, you start to ask Steven for a computer help because he, he was the disc doctor. Yeah.

3 (16m 40s):
So I hadn't had a television in 10 years, and my roommate and I were living in a, a mobile home park that required all of the residents to get satellite. And so I was flipping through the channels of the TV with sort of this anthropological fascination because while I watched a ton of TV as a kid, it had been a really long time. And all of a sudden I am, I'm looking at this show, and I, I said, Alex, is that Stephen? And she said, oh yeah, he's got this, this show about computers. And a few weeks or months later, I'm not sure, I, I did get a computer virus and I didn't know what to do.

3 (17m 24s):
And I called Steven and I felt pretty guilty about it because I was definitely, Hmm. I knew I'd had been keeping him at a distance. Yeah. And I moved down to New Mexico. I I really loved New Mexico, so I moved to Albuquerque and I was waiting tables and writing. And during that time, Steven, well, well, after the computer virus, I was like, okay, he helped me and so now we can be friends. And so for a couple of years we were friends.

3 (18m 3s):
And so he started coming down and visiting me. And then

0 (18m 7s):
In Albuquerque.

3 (18m 8s):
In Albuquerque. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (18m 9s):
But so clearly you guys were at this point, a couple an idol. No, no,

5 (18m 15s):
No,

0 (18m 15s):
No, no, no. You were just going down there to visit,

5 (18m 18s):
But you were clear. God, you were so cute,

0 (18m 19s):
But clearly you were pursuing her. I mean,

5 (18m 22s):
Yeah. Clearly would be an understatement. So, but Elena was on the other side of that equation. So the first time I came down, she says, you know, you can crash on the floor on the futon, but you know, keep your hands away from me.

3 (18m 32s):
Well, I just did. Yeah. I felt like I needed to protect myself and protect you and the friendship from, from what I thought was a bad idea. And so I think part of the reason why it took four years before we got together is that I needed to become emotionally stronger and more self-confident. And Steven needed to become a little more humble.

0 (18m 55s):
And, and Lena, what did you, I mean, this is a very personal question here, but I mean, you know, and this is like couple therapy a little bit. What did you like about Steven? I mean, yeah, there's lots of like, and, and you know, Steven is, but he's, he's alar. He's a big personality. He is. Was that part of what you liked?

3 (19m 12s):
No, I, he's really funny and he's really smart. So Yeah. But there's a cultural difference. I am from Midwestern, generally soft spoken people. The first time we went back to DC to meet his parents, I was like, why are you guys yelling at each other all the time? He's like, what are you talking about? We're not yelling. This is how we talk. And I, I was just so freaked out.

0 (19m 45s):
They're, they're, they're, they're Jews from the

5 (19m 49s):
Anywhere you, you could just stop at their Jews.

3 (19m 52s):
But yes, the northeast definitely.

5 (19m 54s):
And basically for the next nine months, every time we talked, if it occurred to me to ask her to marry me, I would ask her, which means every time we talked, and eventually Elena decided to move back to Boulder and move in with me. And one night I said, so seriously, will you marry me? And she goes, no, you're serious. I went, yeah. She goes, oh, well then, yes,

3 (20m 15s):
I wasn't a hundred percent sure, but I finally said yes, because I knew if I, until I said yes, he wasn't gonna shut up. So we did actually get officially engaged fairly quickly then, you know, the next time I saw him, he brought, he gave me a heart shaped tie dye plastic ring he bought for a quarter from a gumball

5 (20m 37s):
Machine? No, no. It was 50 cents.

3 (20m 39s):
50 cents. Nice. Yeah. And, and I wore it, which apparently told all his friends that I was in fact the right one for him. But we were engaged for over three years.

0 (20m 54s):
I'm, I'm curious, Steven, I, from, from what I understand, you were, you considered yourself retired when you were 38. Correct. How, what did that mean? Were you worth millions and millions of dollars?

5 (21m 7s):
No, again, you know, my whole goal was always, how can I just get enough cash to live comfortably? What can I do without a whole lot of effort? So soon after we got together is when we went to this workshop and learned about ways of generating passive income. One was real estate based, and for the sake of getting specific, we were buying va repo notes.

3 (21m 27s):
Yeah. At what happened is when the VA repossessed a home, they would sell it at auction and they would allow the

0 (21m 35s):
The va Why, why do they, yeah, I don't know. I don't know about this. They repossessed homes.

3 (21m 40s):
So, you know, you could get mortgages that were, I don't know if they were issued or just backed by the Veterans Administration. So military personnel could, could do this. Yep. And if someone defaulted on the mortgage and the VA took the home back, they would sell those houses at auction and they would allow the purchaser to assume the existing VA mortgage, which generally had pretty favorable terms. Right. And so, yeah.

0 (22m 5s):
And you learned about this from a

3 (22m 7s):
Workshop? From a workshop, yeah. Correct. Got it. And there was a guy who had set up an investment company to do this, and so we became limited partners and he would buy these properties and then he would, and you have to keep in mind, this is in the, the mid two thousands, so is before anybody who could fog a mirror, could get a mortgage, it, it was when, you know, there a lot of people were really shut out of the housing market. And so he would sell these properties to people who couldn't qualify for a conventional mortgage with a low down payment, allow them to make payments for a couple of years, get their credit in shape, and then refinance him out.

3 (22m 47s):
That would be the, you know, the goal.

0 (22m 51s):
So how did that work? I mean, how did, if you guys were not wealthy at the time, how did you, how were you able to hand over the money to finance these purchases?

5 (22m 59s):
They weren't that expensive for one. I mean, you could basically assume one of these mortgages for four to $6,000. Wow. And now

0 (23m 5s):
Oh wow. Okay. Yeah. So you, you would basically assume the mortgage as a partner? Correct. And then he would, he would buy you?

5 (23m 13s):
No, I think he would fi then he would find a buyer. So then they have a mortgage with us and the idea was that it was gonna be cash flow for the rest of our life. Yeah. And, and the interest rates we were giving people were actually really good. So, you know, nothing they would've been able to get on their own and very competitive. So we weren't fleecing anybody. In fact, PE we're, you know, people were getting, were were thanking us for giving the opportunity to buy a house.

0 (23m 35s):
But it's risky because these are people who would not have qualified for loans otherwise.

5 (23m 38s):
Yes. That's also correct.

0 (23m 40s):
Got it. Okay. But, but, so how many at, at, at, at sort of the peak of doing this, how many homes did you guys?

5 (23m 46s):
20.

3 (23m 47s):
I think about 20. Yeah. Yeah. But what we didn't realize at the time was that if, if required we would need to make the mortgage payments to the VA mortgage if, if that ever became necessary. It is one of those things you gloss over. Like

0 (24m 6s):
Oh, so essentially if your, if the person that you're renting it to is defaulting, doesn't matter. You still have to pay the VA the money they were

3 (24m 13s):
Renting, they actually bought the,

5 (24m 14s):
They bought it. They, yeah, they were owners, but,

0 (24m 16s):
But they were buying Right by the buyer For the buyer. Yeah. And if they default, like it's hard cuz you're not a bank, you're just two people in Boulder,

5 (24m 23s):
Colorado. And if they trash the place, we're responsible for fixing

3 (24m 25s):
It up. And what he realized was that the prices of these houses had gone up so much that the best investment play was to, rather than continue to do this, was to, to, when he repossessed a house to fix it up and sell it,

0 (24m 47s):
It made more sense to flip it. Yeah. And so what happened, like he started to, he, he, the, your partner basically said, you guys have to start paying these mortgages cuz I'm gonna be flipping these houses, but in the meantime, you've gotta pay the, the monthly mortgage. Yeah. Yep. And you didn't have the cash, so

3 (25m 4s):
Yeah. So it wasn't as bad as it sounded. I mean, you remember those credit cards that Steven mentioned about how he financed his first company. So it was still pretty

0 (25m 13s):
Easy, but you had 20 properties you were involved

3 (25m 15s):
With. Yeah. Yeah. But these were

0 (25m 16s):
Not, but not all of them were, were being correct.

5 (25m 18s):
Some of them were fine.

3 (25m 19s):
Yeah. And, and to be clear, during that time we no longer had the steady monthly income, but we would occasionally get bursts of, you know, large, large deposits from what was left over from a sale, $20,000 or something. So our income was still revenue stream based, but it was choppy and unpredictable.

0 (25m 45s):
So, so you weren't wiped out from the fund, from the real estate collapse, this did not wipe you out. You guys managed to evade it, but you didn't walk away from it Correct. With a whole lot of

3 (25m 56s):
Money. Correct. Yeah, that's exactly right. Our, our partner had the foresight to change the model in a way that was uncomfortable for us, but also ultimately probably protected us Right. In the long run. And

0 (26m 11s):
Because if you kept that model, you, those, all those loans, all those sellers or those buyers sort of defaulted them. Yeah. Probably. Correct.

3 (26m 18s):
Yeah. And the values of the properties, you know, he sold most of them while the market was still running up

0 (26m 24s):
Still hot. Yeah.

3 (26m 25s):
Yeah. So, yeah. So it was a profitable venture for us.

0 (26m 29s):
So really, I mean, and I say this because I know what, what you eventually built, which is what we're gonna talk about now, but basically at, at age 45, Steven and you were getting closer to 40 Elena. I mean, you guys were not, you kind of start again.

3 (26m 48s):
It was scary for me. Yeah. I mean, I, I've spent a lot of my life feeling financially insecure, and so I didn't like it. You know, I really did not like it.

0 (27m 3s):
Yeah.

5 (27m 3s):
And contrary to Elena's experience, mine was always that no matter what I was doing, something would show up at the last minute. So like, one of the reasons that I adore my wife is early on in our relationship, she would ask me these hypotheticals about things that she was worried about in our future and in our relationship. And I would say, I, I don't know. I mean, I'll figure it out when I get there. I mean, I was, I was, I, I used to joke about this, but it was only a half joke at this time. And it's like, I was ready to go apply for a job at Quiznos. I mean, I was gonna do whatever we needed to do to be able to pay the rent, but I was hoping that we would find something else that would be interesting rather than just making sandwiches

0 (27m 43s):
When we come back in just a moment. Steven discovers a new business opportunity after going for a 5K run in his bare feet. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross, and you're listening to How I built this.

ZipRecruiter (27m 60s):
One of the biggest hiring challenges for 2023 is standing out to top talent. Job seekers are looking for everything remote working, flexibility, easy application processes, and better snapshots of what your company culture is like. Fortunately, ZipRecruiter has the tools you need to catch candidates attention. ZipRecruiter shows you candidates who would be a great match for your job, and you can send a personal invite to your top choices. And ZipRecruiter makes it easy for candidates to apply. Instead of filling out a lengthy application, they can apply with just one click to help your job catch the eyes of great candidates. ZipRecruiter also offers attention grabbing labels like urgent training provided remote and more. Get your job noticed by the best and brightest candidates with ZipRecruiter. Four at a five, and employers who post on ZipRecruiter, get a quality candidate within the first day. See for yourself. Go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. ziprecruiter.com/built. Again, that's ziprecruiter.com/b U I L t. ZipRecruiter, the smartest way to hire.

Miro (29m 7s):
Today I have a request for all of you. We're looking for guest suggestions on how I built this community Miro board, and we'd love to hear from you. It's super easy. Just head over to miro.com/built. Miro is actually sponsoring this episode, and if you haven't heard of it, it's the most incredible visual collaboration tool. At first glance, it might seem like just a simple digital whiteboard, but Miro is much, much more than that. It's an infinite board where your team can build on each other's ideas and create something great together from anywhere. While you're leaving us feedback, feel free to play around with miro. You can pick from thousands of templates to get started. Like a quick brainstorm, an icebreaker or a flowchart. I'm really looking forward to seeing how you will add to our board. So go to miro.com/built to leave your thoughts with sticky notes, comments, reactions, and more. That's miro.com/b u i l t miro.com/built.

5 (30m 13s):
Hey, welcome back to how I Built this. I'm guy Roz. So it's around 2007 and after getting out of the mortgage business, Steven and Lena are living in Boulder trying to get another business off the ground and this one in search engine optimization. Meanwhile, Steven decides to return to a passion from his high school track and field days.

0 (30m 34s):
Sprinting.

5 (30m 35s):
A friend of mine came to brunch. He was a runner. Yeah. And he says, do you know there's like an entire master's track and field circuit where they do all the events including the sprints. And I was like, oh, blah, blah, blah. What? So I had no idea.

0 (30m 46s):
Wait, a master's, sorry.

5 (30m 48s):
Like, well, the, so USA track and field in the master's division, they do all of the track and field events. So marathons, half marathons, 1500 meters, 800 meters, I mean, you name it. So it just so happens they also happily do the sprints. But that got me back into it. And you know, the problem with getting back into something in your mid forties is your brain still thinks you're in your mid twenties. And so it literally took me years to learn things. Like when my brain says, let's just do one more, that's the time to walk away. And I spent the next two years pretty much going from injury to injury to injury.

0 (31m 26s):
And were you getting, and and you were just running in regular running shoes?

5 (31m 30s):
Yeah, in fact, I didn't know what to run in, so I asked the coach and the other runners, you know, what do I train in? What do I compete in? And they said, well train in this shoe big, thick, stiff motion controlled padded shoe. Normal shoe. Yeah. And then where are these sprinting spikes? And by the way, by the massage and a half too small, so it's sort of like Chinese foot binding, but that's what you need to hold it on your foot. Well, and I didn't know any better and did what they said.

0 (31m 53s):
And you kept getting injuries.

5 (31m 55s):
Yeah, literally anything from my naval down Yeah. At some point was injured.

0 (31m 60s):
All right. So you're struggling with these injuries and I guess what you have a, I mean, this is around the time anyone who is in a running will remember this is around the time when Christopher Christopher McDougal's book Born to Run comes out, I think came out in 2007. And it, it was a huge bestseller. And I don't think initially, but eventually No,

5 (32m 21s):
No. It took a couple years till it kicked in actually.

0 (32m 23s):
But but you somebody handed you that book, right? Did did, yeah. Did they say, Hey, you know, you might wanna look into this if you're getting a lot of injuries. Like what, what do you remember?

5 (32m 33s):
So my friend Simon hands me Born to run and says, maybe there's something in here. Maybe you should try running barefoot just to see what, what you learn. And so to be clear, I'm not gonna suggest that people run barefoot even though it changed my life. But the gist of it is everything we're gonna talk about when, if it has to do with our business, it's not about footwear, it's about natural form. It's letting your body do what bodies are made to do naturally without getting in the way. And so this idea of running barefoot, it's like, all right, well it seemed interesting and it just, how happened, coincidentally, there was a guy in town who was doing a barefoot running workshop that next weekend. And so I thought, all right, well I'll give it a shot. So we go out for this barefoot run and we're running on grass and we're running on trails, and we're running on roads and we're running over wooden bridges.

5 (33m 18s):
And I was just so enthralled, so entranced with the experience of feeling my feet on the ground and experimenting to see what would happen if I ran faster, but still had the same cadence, the same number steps per minute, or if I landed on that part of my foot or the other part of my foot, I was just really, really fascinated by the whole thing.

0 (33m 38s):
Yeah, I, I, I wanna just interject for a sec because in, in the event that p someone listening does not know about Born to Run, I'm just gonna briefly summarize it, which is, it's a book written by Chris McDougal, massive bestseller, basically looked at this tribe in, in Mexico that runs like 70 mile distances, you know, regularly. These just, just to back and forth and they run barefoot, or they use these very thin rubber sold sandals. And, and so the argument in this book is that actually humans are made to run without cushioning. That cushioning, which was started in the sixties and seventies, that actually is not a natural way to run.

0 (34m 24s):
Right. But just to say that this is, this, this book came out and it really had a massive influence on the way certain type of people run that essentially lots of people migrated this idea of running with just a thin piece of rubber under their foot.

5 (34m 38s):
Yes. So if you're running in bare feet or something truly minimalist, doing it wrong hurts, doing it right feels great. I mean, what we have to do is get people into a state of cognitive dissonance where their own experience undermines something they believe just enough to make them curious and ask questions like, why am I putting my foot in a shoe that squeezes my toes together and could cause bunions? Why am I putting all that foam underneath my foot so I can't feel anything? Why am I elevating my heel, which messes with my posture? You know, if we took a baby when it's learning how to walk, you would never put something on his foot where it couldn't feel, couldn't move and change his posture. So if you wouldn't do that to a baby, why are you doing it to you? Yeah.

0 (35m 17s):
So you basically start to run barefoot just to, just to kind of see what it's like.

5 (35m 24s):
Yeah. So I did that first run and I was at the end of the run and I turned to someone who had a GPS watch on. I said, how far was that? And she looks at her watch and says, that was a little over 5k.

0 (35m 35s):
This is on a track?

5 (35m 36s):
No, no, no, just, just running around Boulder, you know, on Oh shoot. Yeah.

0 (35m 40s):
On but on a surface, presumably you're not running over like crushed glass. But,

5 (35m 45s):
But no, we were running on all sorts of surfaces, things

0 (35m 47s):
That, and you ran five kilometers, which for you was a very long run, cuz you're not a,

5 (35m 52s):
It may as well have been an ultra-marathon. Yeah,

0 (35m 54s):
Right. Because you're not a distance runner. No,

5 (35m 55s):
But it was, it was fascinating and effortless and fun. And so over the next few weeks, my injuries went away, it became faster and I was hooked on this whole idea of not even so much barefoot, but just what was going on with the shoes that I was wearing. And was that part of the problem?

0 (36m 16s):
You, you had to figure out, so, so you, you couldn't presumably compete barefoot. So what did you do? What, what was your solution? Because you knew that the barefoot running worked with your body.

5 (36m 30s):
Right? Well, there's nothing preventing you from running barefoot. There are a couple of barefoot sprinters around the world. Got it. Okay. But it's not optimal because a modern track surface is very abrasive and on that track surface, it would've just ripped the hell outta my feet. Yeah. So I was spending as much time barefoot or in the sandals that I started making inspired by the Tama who you mentioned from Born to Run. Oh,

0 (36m 53s):
You, so you started making your own rubber sandals

5 (36m 56s):
Right away. Right

0 (36m 57s):
Away. You didn't try because, because what happened with the, you, you, the, the, there were, I mean there are vibrams that was what didn't fit the five finger shoes. Yeah. And the, those did not work for you. Right?

5 (37m 8s):
Yeah. They just didn't fit the shape of my foot. And I kept going like every six months to try them. Sort of like when you go to the fridge late at night and you don't find what you want and you come back a few minutes later as if it's a replicator. So I kept doing that and they never fit. And, and so had they, you know, this wouldn't have happened had those things fit my feet. We would've never started zero shoes.

3 (37m 28s):
Well, and he was happy to be barefoot all the time. We had whiteish carpet and I was not happy to have him barefoot all the time. Right. And so he started looking around for materials he could use to make sandals inspired by what the TA were wearing. And he found some outsole material that was actually designed for shoe repair made by Vibram and bought some cord from Home Depot, bright neon colors. And he could, because this material was only sold to shoe repair shops, he had to buy a fairly sizable quantity of it.

0 (38m 11s):
So you would go to a shoe repair shop and buy the rubber soles that vibram the company that made the five finger shoes. And also they make the souls of many other shoe brands. Correct. They, they, you would buy this rubber material and you would stitch your own or like make your own sandals. Yeah. So it was just a sandals, a rubber sold sandal with like a cord for your toes and it wrapped around your ankle.

5 (38m 36s):
That's about it. I mean, if you look at the oldest footwear ever found in archeological digs, I was making something that looked like those, it's basically something to protect your foot and something to hold it on your foot. That's really all you need. And so the other barefoot runners in town asked me to make shoes for them. And so people would stand on this piece of rubber, I'd trace their foot, I'd cut it out with a pair of tin snips, I'd punch a couple holes, I'd lace em up with some tying style that I'd put together and away we went. And that was just a,

0 (39m 2s):
But that was just a, a favor you

5 (39m 5s):
Would do for them. It was a goofy little hobby. I was charging just enough money to pay for the material and buy some, he

3 (39m 9s):
Was trying to make some more, like he had to buy more material than he needed for just himself. Yeah. And so he got some people to go in with him. And then after other people saw that the shoes were kind of cool, then there was another round and another round. And

0 (39m 26s):
Then, and they weren't shoes, they were sandals.

3 (39m 27s):
Sandals, correct.

0 (39m 28s):
Yeah. It was literally a piece of rubber. And then your foot would, you had the, you know, the cord between your big toe and your site next toe, and then it wrapped around the, the back of

5 (39m 39s):
Your foot. Yeah. It was very,

0 (39m 39s):
Very simple. It would stay on your foot while you ran.

3 (39m 42s):
Yeah. But it was, it, it, that strap around the back is actually really important because flip flops actually take a lot of effort to keep on your feet.

0 (39m 52s):
Keep 'em, yeah.

3 (39m 52s):
Yeah. But when you just have that strap around the back, then your toes can relax and your foot can move as intended.

0 (40m 2s):
Got it. I mean, that was it, that was done the end of story. Yeah. But it wasn't the end of the story, obviously. No. What, how, what, I mean, did you have any thought in your mind to turn this into a business? Or did somebody else suggest it, or what happened? How did it, how did you decide to devote a lot of your time to actually seeing if you could make this into a product?

5 (40m 27s):
So the local Barefoot Running coach, a guy named Michael Sandler said to me, Hey, I've got a contract to write a book about barefoot running called Barefoot Running. And if you treated this sandal making hobby of yours like a business and had a website, I could put you in the book. So I've built hundreds and hundreds of websites at that point. So I rush home to pitch this unbelievable opportunity to Elena, who had a slightly different response to mine.

3 (40m 50s):
Yeah. I had noticed over the years that my husband was easily distracted. Yeah. And we were trying to get this SEO business off the ground, and I was like, absolutely not. It's like, we need to got focus, we gotta focus. So no, we, we can't do

5 (41m 9s):
This. Yeah. And so I agreed with her. I said, I wouldn't do it. And then Lena goes to bed before I do. So once she went to bed, I would built a website

0 (41m 16s):
And, and the idea was I'll build a website and Yeah, let's do this. And, and Lena, you're, you're not interested in pursuing this because you've gotta focus on this other business that is starting to, you know, that is gonna be your source of income.

3 (41m 32s):
Yeah. And so I got up in the morning and he sh he shows me this website, all proud of himself.

0 (41m 38s):
And what did you call it, by the way?

5 (41m 40s):
Well, I needed a name and I just, it's two in the morning. And I thought, Hmm. And somehow Invisible shoes popped into my head, but invisible shoes, plural.com was taken. So I just grabbed invisible shoe.com. Got

0 (41m 54s):
It. And and you saw the website the next day,

3 (41m 57s):
Lena? Yes. And I was annoyed. And

0 (42m 0s):
This is in November of 2009, I

3 (42m 3s):
Believe. Yeah, yeah.

0 (42m 4s):
Okay.

3 (42m 5s):
And he said, Hey, look, I know, you know, we need to focus on the SEO thing, but we can use this as a case study. And I grumbled. And I was like, okay, well, and at that point in time, Google was prioritizing video content for seo. And so Steven made a bunch of videos showing people how they could make their own sandals. And he wasn't necessarily pushing the material that we were selling, but it was like, oh, by the way, you know, if you want material, I, we have it for sale. And so he was able to get those videos to rank very quickly because there really wasn't any competition for barefoot terms at that time.

3 (42m 50s):
And so within very short period of time, we started seeing the quite a bit of traffic. And that there, you know, we made our, one of our first sales was in November to a guy in Minnesota for a sandal kit. And I'm like, well that's

0 (43m 7s):
Interesting because this came up on when he did a search for Barefoot running Barefoot running. Correct. And, and did you like it incorporate, did you like form an LLC right away?

3 (43m 19s):
So we had a structure already in place for our previous businesses, and so we, we just kind of threw it into,

0 (43m 27s):
Into

3 (43m 28s):
That, into that. Yeah. But after, in our first year, we made $114,000. Wow. And we're like, okay, this is, this is way more profitable than,

0 (43m 40s):
All right. Before we get to how you made $114,000, let me, let me try to understand what, what, what you did. So you, you put a couple videos out there showing people how they could make their own barefoot running sandals. First

5 (43m 52s):
Of all, even better. I basically showed them how to rip off our entire business model. So it's like, you know, here's where I got material, here's how you do this. I mean, I just gave away the entire farm.

0 (44m 1s):
And, and did you, and, and you were not selling like ready to wear shoes. These were kits, right? It was a piece of rubber and cord and it was like you would send it to somebody and then they would cut out based on their shoe. Yeah. Their foot shape.

5 (44m 16s):
They would, they're based on their foot.

3 (44m 17s):
Yeah. They, we would teach them how to trace their foot and then cut out their own shoes. And you have to understand, you know, so we're not thinking it's 2000, the nine, it's the middle of the great recession. This is a terrible time to start a business where like, this is just happening. But when people read McDougal's book and they're like, well, I can spend a hundred dollars on a pair of five fingers, or I can spend 20 bucks on a kit, I have to make myself Yeah. You know, we were a pretty good bet. And so it was actually really empowering for people.

3 (44m 60s):
First they'd be intimidated, but then they'd be like, oh my gosh, I just made my own shoes. Yeah. And so it was, it was really fun. So we, we did have a service where you could send us a tracing of your foot and we would custom make the shoes for you, but we, we liked the do it yourselfers. They were a lot more fun to deal with.

0 (45m 23s):
Hmm. And, and you got, and so because of the search engine optimization that you would always, you know, be in the top 40, whatever people who are reading that book would find out about you. You, you, I mean it's, I'm, I'm estimating based on a hundred thousand dollars of revenue in that first year. You're selling like over 7,000, 7,500 kits in that first year. Yeah.

5 (45m 46s):
So, sounds about right. Lane Lane is gonna, while Lane is doing the math, I'll say the other, the other piece of the puzzle is, so Chris McDougal is going out and doing book signings for his book. Yeah. And whenever he did a book signing, we would see a lift in sales and we joked that he was our unofficial marketing department, but then I did a really fun bit of gorilla marketing. I would, I printed up few thousand business cards and I would go to bookstores and find his book and then insert our business card in the book. Wow. And then eventually I, I made like 50,000 of those and sent those to customers and asked them to do the same thing. Did

0 (46m 18s):
He, did you ever connect with him at that time?

5 (46m 21s):
We met a few times at various events and had a fine time chatting. And to cut to the end of the story, we're now working together with Chris and his running coach and co-author Eric

0 (46m 32s):
Orton. Wow. All right. So you are set, you sell about more than 7,000 of these kids in,

3 (46m 40s):
In the Yeah. 114,000. So we sold just under 6,000 kits in our first full

0 (46m 46s):
Year, 6,000 kits. And and how did you do that? Was it the two of you putting them, packaging them up, putting them in envelopes, you know, going to the post office, going to the ups?

5 (46m 57s):
Yeah, so we, we, well the other thing we were doing is wrestling the laces away from our two cats. That was, that was,

3 (47m 3s):
Yeah. That was really, they were hazardous conditions.

5 (47m 7s):
Yeah. We had, so we started out in the, on the floor of a corner of a spare bedroom and we literally had a, not a short discussion about whether we should spend $35 to get a table, take things off. It was 60

3 (47m 21s):
Bucks. It was $60 table. Holy crap.

5 (47m 23s):
Yeah. Wow. And then we had, and then we an an even bigger discussion about buying a second table. Yeah. So, but by within not very long, we had our customer, we hired someone to do customer service who was living at our dining room table. We hired someone to do all the shipping and fulfillment, who was living in our living

0 (47m 39s):
Room phone line coming into your house. That was the customer service line.

3 (47m 42s):
Yes. Yeah. Yes. Back when there were phone lines.

0 (47m 46s):
And, and so, and I mean, we should also say at this point, this is a tiny market. I mean, barefoot running was

5 (47m 54s):
Not what you think. So the first thing that we would see is whomever was the barefoot runner in the family would buy one of our kits. Okay. And then within a week we'd see an order for like five more. Yeah. Clearly for other people in the family who just thought these were really cool shoes. Yeah. And so the barefoot running world, definitely small, the world for, you know, a very simple piece of footwear that's lightweight, that's flexible, that lets your foot do it's natural that you can pack, you can stick in your pocket. That was a whole different game. And we started to realize that pretty quickly. In fact, we're walking on the Pearl Street Mall, which is an outdoor shopping thing in Boulder, and a pack of teenage girls run up to us and pointed our sandals and go, oh, those are sick. Where do you get those?

5 (48m 35s):
And we talked for a few minutes and when they left, I turned to Lane, I went, we're billionaires and you know, oh, we just have to capture this. Yeah. So it, it's, people often like to think of what we're doing is very nichey. But of course the joke is, if you look at footwear since the dawn of human history, the first 99.96% of human history, it looked like those sandals. Yeah. The modern athletic shoe is about 50 years old.

0 (48m 58s):
How were you, how were you financing the business in that first year in 2010?

3 (49m 2s):
You remember those credit cards?

5 (49m 4s):
I still had them. Yeah.

0 (49m 6s):
Yep. Did you get any loans?

5 (49m 7s):
Not at first.

3 (49m 9s):
So our first year we did 114,000 in revenue. And the, that was our first 12 months. Yeah. So late 2009 to

0 (49m 21s):
Late 2010.

3 (49m 22s):
2010. And at that point we, we thought, okay, this, this is gonna be its own thing. Yeah. It has potential to be a real business. So we incorporated feel the world at the, in late 2010

0 (49m 35s):
Feel the world is the sort of the the parent company or the the

3 (49m 38s):
Parent company company. Correct. Yeah. And so we, our second year in business and we're not getting paid, you know, everything is going back into the business, going to buying inventory. Sure. So we went from 114,000 to 247,000 to 500,000 in

0 (49m 56s):
Only selling rubbers, sandals,

5 (49m 59s):
DIY kits. Yeah. Do DIY kits, rubber sand kits.

3 (50m 1s):
Yeah, exactly.

5 (50m 3s):
And, and somewhere, yeah, like in the second year, I said, Delena, wouldn't it be nice to have a little internet-based business? Took a couple hours of data to run, made a couple hundred grand a year. And she looked at me, kind of confused and said, that's what we have. I went, yeah, but we can't stay that way. Yeah. I mean, early on, even, even after I built the website, Lena was still a little reluctant, reticent, you know, not quite sure about this. And we met with some guys, we, or we were introduced to the guys who'd been in the footwear bis for 35 years at that time.

0 (50m 30s):
You met them in Boulder?

5 (50m 32s):
Yeah. They were actually in town to try to sell a license to a product they developed to another footwear brand. And, and so they said, you know, we met with them and they said, we believe in you and we believe in what you guys are doing. Natural movement is the most important thing and no one's doing it. But we've been in footwear so long that we're not dumb enough to try to start a shoe company. And le and I both said, yeah, we're hyper optimistic and naive, but that's how things get done. So after that meeting, Lena walks into the kitchen and with the appropriate hand gesture says, I'm all in. And you know, she's a brilliant finance operations person and I'm a product marketing person. Yeah. And so it's been, if it weren't for us being together, I mean, it's the luckiest thing ever.

5 (51m 13s):
This couldn't have happened.

0 (51m 15s):
How did you, I mean, so as you got more and more sales, right? And, and it's, you know, you got more and more people ordering these things, were you still just buying this vibram rubber from local suppliers? I mean, where were you getting your, your material

5 (51m 30s):
From?

3 (51m 31s):
Yeah. Yeah. So we were, we were basically, so Vibram had a bunch of regional distributors. So we'd buy out all of the material in the, the mountain region and then, you know, I'd be making calls to distributors on the east coast. And so we came to the conclusion that we were gonna have to create our own supply. Yeah. And so these gentlemen, Steven referred to put us in touch with a, a manufacturing agent in Korea. They hel these guys, helped us with the initial design for what was actually the first outsole, specifically designed for barefoot style running.

3 (52m 12s):
And then we naively dove into the exciting world of international sourcing and manufacturing.

0 (52m 21s):
So you, so, so these consultants help you connect to a factory in Korea, which would start to make the rubber sheets for you and then presumably already cut and ready to go and ready to ship out to the customer.

5 (52m 37s):
So they made sheets or they made, we designed a mold for a foot shaped, so, so it's already pre-made ah, to handle most foot shapes. And all you would have to do is trim it a little bit. Got it. Little did we know that the problem with alcohol manufacturers in a regular shoe, there's a lot of layers and they all get glued together. And it really doesn't matter how accurate you are with quality control and, and quality assurance. So you can, you can hide a lot of mistakes with glue. And, and the other thing is that the product, having this outsole, it was our entire product.

0 (53m 12s):
Right. The outsole is the product. The whole thing is the whole thing.

5 (53m 16s):
Because

0 (53m 16s):
It had to be perfect. Yeah.

5 (53m 17s):
Well we would've been nice. Yes. So when we fir got the first batch in, the inconsistency was really high. So the, there was times where larger souls weighed less than smaller ones, so they hadn't packed the mold properly where the left and the right didn't match in the same weight or flexibility. It was just a lot of problems. And we had someone who'd been in the footwear biz for a long time say to us, you know, this happens to everybody, but we're really sorry to hear that it happened to you on your first

0 (53m 45s):
Tryout. I, I'm trying to understand why is it so complicated to make a consistent little, little piece of rubber?

3 (53m 52s):
One of the things people don't realize is, you know, shoes take a lot of force. They have to absorb a lot of force, and the more complicated the shoe, the more places there are to hide your sins effectively. Hmm. Yeah. So because our shoe was so simple, a slight deviation from the specifications that we had set could have, you know, a significant impact. So we had put about a hundred thousand dollars on those credit cards to pay for the cost of the molds, and we had to pay in advance of selling the material. So we had a lot invested in this.

3 (54m 32s):
And so when I got, you know, we started shipping our first brand new outsoles, and I got an email from a very sweet woman who was like, Hey. So one of the things that we had done is we had put little side flaps with pre-punched holes. Yeah. So she had ma put her kit together and gone out for a run, and the, the laces had torn through that little hole on the side, and we discovered that a good chunk of the production run, they hadn't packed enough rubber into that part of the mold.

0 (55m 8s):
And so the holes were really

3 (55m 10s):
Flimsy. They were too thin. Yeah. They were

0 (55m 12s):
Too thin. They too thin. And they just ripped when

3 (55m 13s):
You ran up. And they just ripped. And I, I literally sank onto the floor like I thought I was gonna throw up. I was, I was like, we're going bankrupt

0 (55m 27s):
When we come back in just a moment. Hall, Elena and Steven pivot to a new manufacturer and a new brand name and how they wind up on Shark Tank after having to ask, what's Shark Tank? Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross, and you're listening to How I Built This.

Capital One (55m 49s):
With the Capital One Spark Cash Plus card, you earn unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase, and it has no preset spending limit. So your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. The Antonelli's who own Antonelli's Cheese Shop in Austin, Texas use their 2% cashback from their Spark Cash Plus card to help cover their employees' healthcare costs. Imagine what the Spark Cash plus card from Capital One could do for your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet. Find out more@capitalone.com slash spark. Cash plus terms and conditions apply.

UserTesting: The Human Insight Platform (56m 26s):
Reading Minds is hard. Good news is you don't have to remove the guesswork and build products with greater confidence by including direct customer feedback using UserTesting. At each stage of the product development process, companies are being asked to do more with less. They need to move quickly to build experiences that meet changing customer expectations, and they need to do so faster than ever, all while minimizing risk and costly rework. With user testing, you can get rapid feedback from your target audiences so that you can make higher confidence decisions earlier, faster, and throughout the product development process, design, develop, deliver, and optimize products and experiences with confidence and less risk. Start your free test today at usertesting.com/ibt. That's usertesting.com/ibt.

3 (57m 22s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. So it's around 2011, and Steven and Elena are facing a major meltdown with their Korean manufacturer. It's shipped out thousands of rubber outsoles, but many of them are too flimsy and way too easy to rip wa Was that entire shipment useless? Or did was it okay in the End? I

5 (57m 45s):
Think you salvaged a bunch.

3 (57m 46s):
Yeah, I mean, I, I don't know the exact percentages, but we were able to do some QC to pull out the ones that were definitely going to break. Yeah. And then when other ones did break, we came up with a protocol for fixing the problem. And we learned, you know, I mean, it's very difficult to become a new manufacturing client because the factory's losing money on you. They're, they're really, they're taking a

0 (58m 15s):
Bet. You're a pain, you're a tiny, tiny customer for them. They're making, they're a pain outsoles for big shoe companies. Oh,

5 (58m 22s):
It's worse. We are tiny. And we didn't know that we were tiny and didn't know that, you know, they didn't really care

0 (58m 27s):
About us, and you're being a pain in the, in the ass. You're saying, Hey, we need you to change your processes. And they're like, they're like, you're a tiny

5 (58m 34s):
Clonk Again, we were hyper optimistic and naive.

3 (58m 36s):
Yeah. And so we got fired by

0 (58m 39s):
Our, they kicked you outta the factory. Kicked

3 (58m 40s):
Us outta the factory.

5 (58m 41s):
Oh. Even better, they kicked us outta Korea. So when we, I swear, so we started reaching out to other, other outsole factories in Korea, and they'd say, oh no, we heard about you

0 (58m 50s):
Already and you're a pain. We don't wanna deal with

5 (58m 52s):
You. Right. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (58m 54s):
And so where did you go? Where, where did you find the new manufacturer?

5 (58m 58s):
We lucked out. There was a footwear industry magazine that we got, and the cover was a story about a group out of New York that were manufacturing agents. And so Lena reached out to them and they said, we're happy to talk. I flew out to New York and met with them and for reasons that to this day I barely understand. They decided to work with us. In fact, even more, what I found out years later is that they vetted us. They called around and asked about us and a whole, and a whole bunch of people like vouched for us. And I could not be more grateful, but I mean, we were this tiny little goofy sandal kit company, and people were saying, oh no, you, these guys are good. You gotta work with them.

5 (59m 38s):
And they did.

0 (59m 39s):
They connected you to a, a Chinese manufacturer.

5 (59m 43s):
Yes. Their whole job is to work with you to find various factories to make whatever you're making.

0 (59m 51s):
Hmm. And meanwhile, I think this is now around 2011, you guys get your first loan. It's, it's a significant loan, like $200,000. And you got it from a private lender, not from a, a bank. I think it's a private family office. Also, I think around this time, like 2012 or 13, you changed the name of the brand from Invisible Shoes to Zero Shoes with an X. Right. X E R O, which I think is a great name, zero shoes. But tell me why you changed the name.

5 (1h 0m 21s):
Well, I was introduced to someone who had been the VP of marketing for a multi-billion dollar fitness company, and we got together for lunch and the first thing he said, he looks at my feet and he goes, I can see them. I said, yeah, but it's, you know, it feels like there's nothing on your foot, so it's kind of invisible. He goes, I can see them. It's like, all right. And he goes, besides Invisible is not something you can protect very easily. So we had been referred to a small marketing agency, they'd all left a big agency and started their own thing. And they came up with a bunch of names that were, let's say, unspell and Unsayable, but they had one that started with an X Here, I'll give it to you, is X O I C S?

5 (1h 1m 5s):
Any clues?

0 (1h 1m 7s):
Zeke?

5 (1h 1m 7s):
I don't know. So I said, yeah, that's not gonna work. They said, well, you can own it. I said, we don't have that kind of money. We're an internet-based company. We need to be nimble, and we need people to be able to spell our domain name. So the next day it's right off track practice. And I'm sitting in my car and I'm thinking, I like the thing starting with X. Where can I go with that? And then Zero popped into my head, and then I came back and presented that and said, that's what we're gonna do.

0 (1h 1m 33s):
And that was it. And that was it. Hmm. You, there was something, I think a pretty pivotal moment, which was in 2012 you guys applied to go on Shark Tank. And you know, that's obviously a huge opportunity because it's a huge publicity opportunity. Tell me about that decision. I mean, I'm, I'm assuming you did that because it was a, a marketing opportunity to get this in front of more eyeballs.

5 (1h 2m 2s):
Well, the first part was the people kept saying, you guys should be on Shark Tank. And we kept saying, what's Shark Tank? So that's how it began. And we actually applied originally at the end of 2011. I sent in an email with an app as an application, and then I made a video and I sent that as well. And we got a call from the show. They had had 36,000 email applications. And again, crazy amount of luck. The person who saw ours, her boyfriend, had read Board to Run and was a huge fan of that idea. And she says, yeah, we definitely want you to apply, and there's an application that you have to send in that for reasons that I don't really understand, has to be handwritten and you can't read either Lena's or my handwriting.

5 (1h 2m 42s):
So we typed out our answers and then paid someone from Craigslist to hand write the answers. And we sent that in, and then they sent us a contract, which is incredibly onerous. You can't change anything about it. You either sign it or you don't. And they said, you know, this is not a guarantee of anything, it's just the next step. And the moment they received the contract via FedEx, they called and said, all right, we want you on the show.

0 (1h 3m 4s):
Wow. Okay. You get on the show and then I've seen it and anybody can wash it. And you get out there, and by this point, by the time you, you were taped, you had taped it, which is July of 2012, you had sold in two and a half years, over $650,000 worth of these sandal kits. Yeah. And you, you go on there with a valuation of I think 5 million. That's what you value the company at. Right. And, and, and, and suffice it to say the sharks are not particularly generous and, and you know, not really super interested in this brand. You did get one offer from Kevin O'Leary for, he, he asked for half of the company, 50% of the company for $400,000.

0 (1h 3m 53s):
And obviously you turned that down. I'm just curious, what was it? I mean, did you walk outta there disappointed? Or did you walk outta there thinking, oh, well, well that's fun. At least we'll get some publicity outta this.

5 (1h 4m 3s):
That's an interesting question. Well,

0 (1h 4m 5s):
Look, because it's really a performance, it's not. Right.

3 (1h 4m 8s):
It's a, yeah. It's, it's a, and I think Robert said this in his book, people think that it's a business conversation that happens to be on television, but it's actually a television show that happens to be about business. So you asked how we felt coming out of there, and I think the answer is sort of in shock because it's such a surreal experience. And honestly, the most nervous I was during the entire process was we had a, a shark tank viewing party, and we were listed as the first segment, but they actually aired us last.

3 (1h 4m 54s):
So when, when we finally, they finally aired our segment, it was like, oh, thank goodness. But you're also wondering, how are they gonna make us look? Are we gonna, you know, cuz you haven't seen the edit, you don't know what's gonna happen. And so we get through it, we feel like, okay, they gave us a nice edit, you know, we looked like delusional entrepreneurs, but that's accurate. So Okay. But the phone didn't ring right away and

5 (1h 5m 21s):
No, no, no. On the phones nothing happened. Yeah. But immediately what was happening with our internet traffic is it blew up. We had two, the internet traffic. Yeah. We had 270,000 visitors at the sa at, at one time for about 12 minutes.

0 (1h 5m 34s):
Wow.

3 (1h 5m 35s):
Yeah. And then about 45 minutes after the airing, then the phone started blowing up as well. Yeah. And the orders just started pouring in. And we did 10% of, of our lifetime sales volume in that week,

0 (1h 5m 50s):
In that, that week. Wow. Yeah. And so in that, in that time after Shark Tank, what, what did you start work? I mean, did you start working on sort of ready to wear sandals? I mean, you were still doing kits at the time, but did you start to think about, okay, now we've gotta go to the next thing?

5 (1h 6m 8s):
Yeah,

3 (1h 6m 9s):
So through a coincidence, we met Dennis Driscoll, who had been the former head of global design and development for Crocs. Hmm. And it was a kind of a handshake agreement. So yeah. You know, we paid him more than anybody else at the time, but still, you know, a 10th of what he'd been making. Yeah. So what he, so it started out, Stephen had plenty of ideas. Dennis really brought the knowledge of how to translate those ideas into actual shoes. So we wanted to do ready to wear, and Dennis was able

0 (1h 6m 49s):
To ready to wear sandals. Right. And same factory in China could make those.

3 (1h 6m 54s):
Well, when we came out with the Z Trail, which had a multi-part soul, and

5 (1h 7m 0s):
That, that's the, that's the

3 (1h 7m 1s):
Sports

0 (1h 7m 2s):
Sandal trail running sandal. Yep.

3 (1h 7m 4s):
Yeah. We did need to move at that point in time to a more competent factory. And we had some interesting lessons. We learned that our first factory had actually patented our saal design in China. So that was something we had to deal with.

0 (1h 7m 23s):
And Oh, they patented it in China, which you had, they took your design.

5 (1h 7m 28s):
Yes.

0 (1h 7m 28s):
Oh, wow.

5 (1h 7m 30s):
Yes. Yeah. It cost us some money, but luckily we had already shown it publicly in advance of them doing that, so that allowed us to get the patent back. Yeah.

3 (1h 7m 36s):
So anyway, adventures in, in manufacturing. So these are things that, you know, when you're naively thinking, how hard could this be you, you never imagine the kind of stuff that you're gonna run into and the amount of money that's gonna cost to deal with some of this stuff.

5 (1h 7m 54s):
Yeah. Yeah. You definitely don't imagine how much money you're gonna spend on legal bills. Right.

0 (1h 7m 60s):
All right. So you are still focused on sandals at this point, 2014, but, but you're starting to obviously at this point, and, and I guess was it, maybe it was Dennis Driscoll's influencer, his experience, you, you decide that you are going to make a closed toe running shoe, a zero drop, and that means that the, the heel and the toes are the same level running shoe. So basically a, a closed shoe with a, a, a rubber soul and that's it. No cushioning, nothing. Correct. Why did you decide, I mean, was that just, I mean, it seems obvious, but was that, was that the direction you were headed in any way? Or was there somebody, or some reason why you decided to pursue that?

5 (1h 8m 44s):
We have a very interactive relationship with our customers online, and they are just constantly telling us what they want next. And again, we will think of ideas on our own, but a lot of what has driven the growth of our product line, and it's now what do we have, 34 different styles? Something, something

3 (1h 9m 0s):
Like that,

5 (1h 9m 2s):
You know, they would just tell us again after we're making sandals, what are we gonna do when it's winter? What am I gonna do at the office? What am I gonna do if I'm road running or trail running or fill in the blank,

3 (1h 9m 11s):
What can I wear with a duress? Yeah.

0 (1h 9m 13s):
And, and so you started to design closed toe shoes. And how did you, I mean, how did you design them? Did you, who, who designed them?

5 (1h 9m 24s):
Well, let's start with our, our sandals where we were doing the custom made sandals and people were sending a tracing of their foot. So we had about 5,000 foot tracings, and we mapped those out to come up with the right shape for a shoe. So most shoes have pointy toe boxes that squeeze your toes together. And we were seeing what human feet actually looked like. So we were literally like taking these tracings, putting 'em on a piece of foam core tracing around them, marking dots where people's toes were, and just doing a, the closest thing to a big data play just to figure out the shape to make something that actually works with a human foot. Dennis was designing the shoe.

5 (1h 10m 4s):
And so Dennis and I would just go back and forth between either ideas of his or ideas of mine until we ended up with something that we liked.

3 (1h 10m 12s):
And we had to educate the factories and the development offices about how our customers wanted shoes to be, because there is a standard way of doing things. And we'd say, we want this. And then they would be like, oh, well they would just put in a stiff heel counter, for example, because that's what's traditionally done, but that would be abrasive and uncomfortable. And so we had to go back and say, no, no, no, you need to take this out. And they're like, but that's not how it's done. So, so there was a, just a, a, a very, a lot of heavy lifting. And so that, that was a big, it took a lot of time.

0 (1h 10m 55s):
You were still a pretty small business when those shoes came out. I think that year you did about 3 million in revenue, obviously impressive growth, but still a small shoe brand. How were you getting the word out about these new closed tow shoes? I mean, obviously you had a customer base who had bought the sandals, but, but you know, there are other, at this point, there are other brands that are making quote unquote minimalist, choose some of the big players were doing versions of it. So how did you get the word out?

5 (1h 11m 23s):
The biggest thing was simply word of mouth. And whenever I can find any opportunity to create some sort of content or to engage with some audience or to find someone who has leverage over their own audience, that's what I'm gonna do. And as the business has grown, our ability to do that has grown. So our, our email list is, you know, just shy of a million people and we have, we have a, a list that we call our inner circle list for people who raise their hand and say they really want to help. And it's like 70,000 people. Wow. We reach out and ask them to do something like vote on a new color or go to some website and comment on a post. Like tens of thousands will go and do it. So people just, they want to be helpful

0 (1h 12m 2s):
And, and really, you know, you, you were, this was entirely direct to consumer. I mean, this was a, a purely up until, you know, few years ago, but, but you know, into 20 16, 17, 18, this was a, you were not in brick and mortar stores,

5 (1h 12m 19s):
Right?

3 (1h 12m 20s):
We were in a few small independent running shops. Yeah. But yeah, we wanted to be wholesale. That was the model. But Steven had the internet marketing background. It was so valuable because it allowed us to have the conversation with our customers and we expected that, you know, the goal was always that, that we would transition to wholesale, however, well

5 (1h 12m 51s):
Not entirely, just add that to the mix,

3 (1h 12m 53s):
Add that to the mix, but that, that would be how the business would really take off.

0 (1h 12m 59s):
Yeah. One of the things that, that I think is, I'm, I'm curious about is as you, you know, got more and more attention, did you find that some of the big competitors were making life hard for you or trying to compete with you? I mean, especially as you were getting into retail shops?

5 (1h 13m 18s):
Well, there are a couple things that we've seen. We go to trade shows and I walk around and see the big companies and go, Hey, that's an idea that I came up with three years ago. So there's a lot of that that goes on in the footwear world in general. I took it as a good sign when I started seeing big companies take ideas, design ideas that we came up with when we were first trying to get into retail. We had a significant order that was supposed to get placed one day by a major, major retailer. And at the end of the day, the order didn't come through. And we called and said what happened. And from investigating what we were told is that one of our multi-billion dollar company, coincidentally, had reached out and said, we don't want that product in your store.

5 (1h 13m 58s):
Because they had been tracking sort of a iconic store in Boulder that they used to see, you know, what's happening, where we started outselling them. And that was a very interesting thing. And again, we were what, like a two, 3 million company at that point. Right. I'm thinking if they're afraid of us now, that's a really good sign.

0 (1h 14m 16s):
Hmm. And, and I guess you guys become profitable, not hugely profitable, but profitable in, in 2015 and, and a few years after that, you're, you, you were going to take on your first outside investment from a, a company called Investment Group called tcp. Yeah. But before we get to that, I, I wanna ask you about the, the periods sort of leading up to it because, you know, not only were you, were you gonna have to deal with a pandemic, but there was also like a trade war happening with China, which essentially means that the tariffs on imports are gonna go way up, right? Yeah,

3 (1h 14m 49s):
Yeah. So we actually, the trade war was a really big challenge for us cuz it start, there were no supplemental tariffs supplied to footwear at first, but by the time they announced them in September of 2019, we had already placed a multimillion dollar order and suddenly we were going to have to face massive, massive tariff. Massive tariff, like half a million dollars in unexpected. Wow. And so because they were, you know, first it was one amount announced and then another amount threatened. And so we're scrambling to, to work with our factories.

3 (1h 15m 30s):
Can you accelerate this order to get it in before this second round of tariffs come in? So,

0 (1h 15m 37s):
And, and, and just, just should interject to this point, because you were really on the line here, right? Because you also owed a lot of money to different lenders, like people and banks who'd been loaning you money over the years and they were, I think some of them were starting to get antsy, right?

3 (1h 15m 51s):
Right. By 2020 we had personally guaranteed 5 million in debt financing, a combination of SBA loans, the, this family office as well as short term lines of credit. And so, you know, my investors at the end of, they, they're all upset about how much inventory I have on my books at the end of 2019 and then 2020 rolls around China factory start shutting down and all

0 (1h 16m 27s):
The, you're in a great position all

3 (1h 16m 29s):
Of a

0 (1h 16m 29s):
Sudden you got all this inventory. Exactly.

3 (1h 16m 31s):
I'm a genius. Yeah. You know, and so we, you know, Steven has an amazing ability to turn inventory into cash. So I am never afraid of having too much inventory, but I am terrified of not having enough because if you don't have inventory, you have nothing to sell and you have no income. So, you know, we survived the trade war, we were in good position for the pandemic, but I, you know, 5 million in debt, it's a lots,

0 (1h 16m 59s):
A lot. That's, that's scary. That's hard. Right? You, you lose sleep over that

3 (1h 17m 3s):
It, well, you become numb to it. I mean, after half a million dollars, it's like, yeah, well,

5 (1h 17m 10s):
Whatever. Yeah, yeah. What are they gonna do

3 (1h 17m 11s):
To me now? Yeah, exactly. We didn't own a house, we, we, right. But I, you know, at that point we had 30 or 40 employees and you feel incredibly responsible for these people's lives and their families and their health and wellbeing. And I just felt like we got lucky twice. Both of these things could have put us outta business, but I, I just can't risk that happening again.

0 (1h 17m 40s):
You needed, you, you were looking for some kind of stability and, and presumably right between the demand that from, from, you know, consumer demand and then also just the debt, right. You, it made sense to bring in an outside investor.

3 (1h 17m 55s):
Yeah. I mean, I I, when we got the offer from tcp, I am so glad we took it because then the supply chain crisis hit. Yeah. And so all of our best sellers were out of stock and we needed a million dollars on air to spend on air freight. So we would have something to sell and we would not have done that if we had not taken that investment

0 (1h 18m 18s):
Would if you didn't bring in Yeah. And so essentially, I mean it's, it's one of these, these paradoxes, right? Because the business is doing great, you're doing gangbusters, but at the same time, like if you don't have the line of credit and, and, and you can't finance the inventory, and it can even with great sales, it can collapse

5 (1h 18m 37s):
Even more. I mean, the greater it is, the higher the probability of collapse because you're always gonna end up over leveraged in some way or subject to some weird change. I mean, I think of companies that have one major wholesale account, if that one account, if anything changes for that account, they're dead in the water. Yeah. So it's, you know, there's so many things that can impact a business, especially when it's growing quickly.

0 (1h 18m 59s):
Yeah. So now, so now with an outside investor involved, does that enable you? I mean, has that enabled you now in the, in the, you know, now we're two and a half years, three, almost three years since you took that investment, has that enabled you to, to do things that you couldn't have done before? Like in terms of, obviously you've expanded your line and you know, you're growing, I think you're gonna hit 40, almost $50 million in, in sales, right? You're on target for that this year.

3 (1h 19m 30s):
Well, we did 48 million in net revenue, well net sales

0 (1h 19m 37s):
In

3 (1h 19m 37s):
2022. And so the answer is absolutely yes. So the first thing is it allowed us to buy more inventory. We actually didn't know how much we needed because we kept selling out. So you can't figure out how popular a product is if you sell out before, you know, the demand starts to, to peter down. And so, yeah. So first it allowed us to just really stock up and start to figure out what the demand was. And so we now, you know, for a long time it was just Dennis designing shoes. Yeah. Now we have three designers and three developers, and we were able to bring in much more skilled financial help.

3 (1h 20m 26s):
It's, I I, I wonder to myself, how did we even survive? Like the whole thing was held together with spit and swizzle sticks and it was incredibly difficult and stressful. And so having the private equity investor has allowed us to really create a solid infrastructure underneath what we're doing. And so we have a platform for even more growth.

0 (1h 20m 49s):
The, the, the global athletic footwear market is enormous over, you know, 160 billion by the end of this decade. But barefoot choose is a fraction of that market. And you know, a lot of, a lot of times when you're starting a business, people say, well, that's a tiny market, you know, it's only worth, it's only gonna be worth three, $400 million. There's gonna be tons of people trying to eat at that, you know, at that, you know, trying to take a slice of that pie. So what's your response when people say, you know, this is still a tiny market, and are you essentially trying to position yourself to be the dominant player in that market?

5 (1h 21m 30s):
Yes, we are very close to actually being the dominant player in this space, and we don't want to pigeonhole ourselves in this whole idea of the barefoot market because again, the customers that we have the number who know nothing about this idea of barefoot or minimalist or whatever, they just experience the comfort and benefits of our product. And we hear about people who are wearing our shoes for 20 different reasons. And so we have a number of professional athletes who are living in our shoes. We have a number of music celebrities who are wearing our shoes when they are not being seen on stage because they're being paid by big shoe company to wear those shoes. We have parents of kids with a d d and ADHD who swear by what we're doing.

0 (1h 22m 12s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 22m 13s):
You know, you can call us delusional entrepreneurs because we genuinely believe that this footwear is better for you. And while we may be pushing the boulder uphill a little bit, we don't think we're gonna be doing that forever. We we're doing, you know, there are so many easier ways to make a living than being in the footwear industry. Like if you're thinking about starting a shoe company, I would just say run as fast as you can in the other direction, but which

0 (1h 22m 45s):
Is what everybody told you when you started it.

3 (1h 22m 47s):
Right, exactly. Yes. It's, it's good advice. But, but we're still here because we believe so passionately in what we're doing. Our customers are so evangelical about, you know, they are, you know, our frontline marketing army, the number

0 (1h 23m 3s):
Of I've I've seen it. I, I, look, I don't think it's any secret. I I'm a square of your shoes and, and, and started wearing 'em three years ago, and I have several pairs and every time I go on a trail run or something, I see somebody there wearing them. It's like, it's like you're in a secret society, or, or often people say where wear those shoes. Yeah. You know, people, and, and I have, I have talked, people have asked me about them. Well, and you're not even paying me.

5 (1h 23m 29s):
No.

0 (1h 23m 30s):
Look, your goal was Steven, your goal was to, to retire at, at, you know, 35 and have passive income and things have changed, you know, do your hobbies. I mean, you could, you, you could, you know, sell the rest of the business and and truly actually be retired and totally financially set and indulge your, you know, various, you know, interests and, and you could do that. Now

5 (1h 23m 59s):
I'll tell you, I'm, I'm sort of wrestling with this to be honest. I'm 60 years old and on the one hand I want to be part of turning this into a multi-billion dollar company as long as we have all the people in place so that I'm only doing the parts that I like doing and that I enjoy doing that I do well on the other hand, I'm 60 years old and I don't wanna work for the rest of my life. Yeah. And frankly, I had a,

6 (1h 24m 24s):
Pardon me,

5 (1h 24m 28s):
It's the first time this has happened.

6 (1h 24m 31s):
Hmm.

0 (1h 24m 36s):
He had a health scare.

5 (1h 24m 38s):
Yeah. The last Jesus, it's the first time this has happened and I'm not sad, it's just hitting me. So yeah, I had a, a health scare and, And I could not be more grateful for it because it really brought into focus a how precious life is, and I just find myself just overwhelmed with how beautiful and wonderful and lucky and grateful in every positive word you can think of. That's been my experience for the last six weeks.

5 (1h 25m 19s):
But it also made it very clear why would I spend a whole lot of time making my life difficult instead of enjoying it with my wife and my dog and being helpful. And ironically, I might be more helpful for this movement when I'm not the CEO of a company where people think I have a conflict of interest.

0 (1h 25m 36s):
Maybe, maybe like the brand ambassador,

5 (1h 25m 38s):
Something, you know, there's gotta be a way of doing it where, where Lane and I can participate in a way that's maximally using what we're good at without taking over our entire lives, which is what it's done for the last 13 years. And that would be nice.

0 (1h 25m 55s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 25m 56s):
Well, and I, I, I think the, I think silver lining of this health scare is that Steven had to not open his computer for a week, which during the entire 23 years that we've been together has never happened. Yeah. And so

5 (1h 26m 23s):
It was awesome, by the way. Yeah.

0 (1h 26m 25s):
I mean it's a, it's an, it's such an important perspective, you know, and, and remarkable that in, I mean, we're here we are in 2023 and you've got this brand that has really made a huge impact in the world of, of fitness and running and, you know, even lifestyle. Yeah, yeah. Do you, first to, first to you, Elena, how much of, of, of what's happened with this brand, do you, do you attribute to the hard work and, and the skill and and effort that you put in? How much do you think has to do with luck?

3 (1h 27m 2s):
That is an excellent question. So I would say I can't really break it down that way because it's sort of a hundred percent luck and a hundred percent hard work and, but it's really a hundred percent luck. Yeah. There's so many things. You know, if Chris McDowell had never written that book, if Steven wasn't an internet marketer, if he and I didn't have complimentary skillsets, I, I would never have been able to create this business without him. He would never have been able to create this business without me. So without luck, you know, there, there are just so many ways this could never have happened or had a premature demise.

0 (1h 27m 51s):
Yeah. What do you think, Steven?

5 (1h 27m 54s):
First of all, when I listen to your show, this is my favorite part because this is something that I think people over, well look, we know from psychological research, people over at value their own role and things that go well and undervalue it and things that go badly. When I was in film school, one of our teachers was the now late director of Mueller Foreman and someone said to him one day, how do you make a good movie? And pardon my bad check accent, milish Mueller said, well, making good movies, he's 90% casting. And as the other 10% is also casting. And so that's how I think of business. It's 90% luck and the other 10% is also luck.

5 (1h 28m 35s):
And then just like Lena said, there's a whole separate a hundred percent where it's 90% working your butt off and the other 10% hopefully being smart enough or finding someone smart enough to know how to put out the fires that started overnight despite the fact that nothing changed since yesterday. Yeah. So, you know, hopefully with a little gratitude, humility and not trying to reinvent a wheel that put itself together in ways that I can't imagine, it's gonna be interesting to see what happens next.

0 (1h 29m 1s):
That's Steven Session and Elena Phoenix, co-founders of Zero Shoes. By the way. We have a happy update for you on Steven's Health. Since we spoke, Steven heard back from his doctors and we're happy to report that after minimal treatment, it looks like Steven is now in the clear. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is H ibt. Id do wonder e.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This, and mine is at Guy Raz and on Instagram. We're at How I Built This and I'm at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Kiki with music composed by Rameen era Bluey.

0 (1h 29m 43s):
It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Catherine Siper. Our production staff also includes Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Casey Hermann, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung Cini, Carla Estevez, and Sam Paulson. I'm Guy Raz and even listening to How I Built This, Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I Built This Early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com.

0 (1h 30m 28s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

Sandy Spring Bank (1h 30m 37s):
Everyone knows that putting money aside in savings is really important, but then what should you keep your savings locked in a CD for a higher rate or keep them liquid in a money market? Can your checking account help you save too? Or is it about creating the right combination? We believe real Banking is a conversation. Let's talk about the savings options that are right for you. Learn more@sandyspringbank.com. Member F D I C.