2 (0s):
So before we start the show, I want to tell you about to live episodes. I'll be recording in just a few weeks and how you can come see them in person. If you are a fan of 90s alternative music you will not want to miss my live conversation with the founders of sub pop the legendary recording label behind bands like Nirvana Soundgarden The

1 (21s):
Shins and many

2 (22s):
many others that show is happening on March 26th in where else Seattle and Benaroya Hall and then the Very next night, March 27th. I'll be in San Francisco interviewing Ken Grossman founder of one of the biggest craft. Beer makers in America Sierra Nevada Brewing Company that's happening at the Sydney Goldstein theater in San Francisco. Now, if you haven't been to a live recording of the show, they are super fun. Come on down meet your fellow listeners be a part of the show. Laugh cry grab some how I built this swag and come say hi to me in the team. So I really hope to see you in either. Or maybe both San Francisco and Seattle are March 26th and 27th for tickets.

2 (1m 6s):
Visit NPR presents dot-org. Hey everyone. So today we've got another one of my conversations from the how I built this Summit that happened last October in San Francisco. Jenny Burton Bauer has spent the past eight years perfecting her signature line of ice cream flavors, which include fluffernutter pie goat cheese and And cherries and my personal favorites Bramble Berry crisp and biscuits and peaches. And these are just a few of the unusual flavors. You'll find a Jeni's Splendid ice creams, which all began at a Columbus Ohio farmer's market back in 2002 today.

2 (1m 46s):
Jenny's is a staple at Whole Foods and there are nearly 40 scoop shops across the United States in my live conversation on stage. I asked Jenny about staying true to herself and how her ice cream can be that amazingly good. Without any egg yolks. I want to talk to you about a word that comes up a lot and I have really mixed feelings about this word and I hope some of you do too which is authenticity. We hear this word a lot be authentic be your authentic self your true self. And one of the really cool things about your story that I remember is that in the early days when you had your first version of what would become Jeni's Splendid later on you, you know used to wear like torn jeans and you had Green and purple hair and at a certain point you realize that that actually wasn't working that something about your look and the aesthetic of what you were selling wasn't right and you decided to change you took the dye out of your hair.

2 (2m 45s):
You started wearing all white you sort of looked like a like a pharmacist and your ice cream shop and ice maker it became a kind of reflected that clean aesthetic and and I'm wondering I mean, you know you could Well, Jenny, you know you weren't being your authentic self at that time. But of

1 (3m 6s):
course I absolutely was it absolutely was yeah, I realized that I was communicating through what I was wearing and it was you know, it was it was, you know, goofy thrift store outfits. I mean, they're really cute and I had pink hair for a long time and but I wasn't conveying that sort of who I think I felt like on the inside honestly and and what I thought that I wanted from my ice cream maker, you know, the other thing. Was that it scream my first ice cream shop. I thought that I could be this ice cream artiste and like everybody would be so excited about whatever I was doing today that they were just, you know, come down and figure and stand in line. And you know, what's the great Jenny have today and you know, I was really thinking more like an artist or a, you know, a wannabe artist.

1 (3m 50s):
I was I quit art school to make ice cream then and when I got to Jenny's in 2002, when I open Jenny's I I took all emphasis off of Me on purpose. I had learned the lesson that no one comes to a business for whatever I'm making today. I don't go to businesses for that. I go to a business for what I had the last time I was there not for some new thing. I might change my mind when I get there and so once I learned that I knew that I had to create this like signature line that everybody knew about and that you was like craveable in the middle of the night and you just had to have it the next day and then I could play around with other stuff and then those could move on to the signature list if they were. Good enough, and if people loved him enough and so that was part of like that take the emphasis off me put it on customers still add, you know my passion to this but not make it about me anymore make it about other people and I knew what people love because they knew that they loved it scream when I had my first shop but I didn't always have that so that constant disappointment is not a very good way to run a business.

1 (4m 51s):
Do you do

2 (4m 52s):
sort of agree with me? This idea of authenticity is being complicated because you know the message we get is be your true self your authentic self and And not all of us know how to do that or what that actually means.

1 (5m 5s):
Yeah, it is. It's a complex thing right now, especially when you talk about companies and Brands building authenticity and starting with authenticity because what does that actually mean? That's something that you can't make you have to do and it takes a long time and I think that so many times for me. Anyway, I think authenticity it's a trust for yourself and it's not trusting that you'll never make mistakes. It's trusting that you will but you'll get yourself. Self out of trouble and I think that authenticity almost comes from that place of trust for yourself, you know, because the people in the companies that we find the most authentic are the ones that are making mistakes sometimes or that are trying things that are pushing themselves.

2 (5m 44s):
So I want to own a sort of shift gears a little bit and ask you about perfectionism because for those who know about your company and about you you're a bit of a perfectionist. I mean you obsess over ice cream in a way that few people obsess over any products

1 (5m 60s):
Right. I mean we start with what the cows eat and that every year our ice cream recipes change. I mean right now we're talking about extended hold times for pasteurization and how that will impact stability. We don't use stabilizers emulsifiers corn syrup high fructose corn syrup a whole bunch of other ingredients that are very typical in ice cream or even egg yolks, but we figured out that that there's various ways to make milk proteins like that way and it's really fun and extremely delicious but it's all still an experiment and it's a big challenge. I think it's one of the reasons that 24 years in I'm still extremely excited about what we can do this year. And what we're going to try this here is going to impact what we're going to do next year.

1 (6m 41s):
I mean, they're kids.

2 (6m 42s):
Sorry to interrupt. Sorry. I can get like really excited about this. Yeah. I know

1 (6m 45s):
me too. I'd like I can feel my cheek. Yeah. I'm yes. I was

2 (6m 48s):
I've noticed that there are no egg yolk. So it's the sort of I guess you

1 (6m 51s):
unless you want it to be unless you want there to be a joke, right like in an eggnog or

2 (6m 55s):
something like that. But I mean even like the peaches you buy for the peach cobbler or The cherries you use for the goat cheese. I mean you Source it in an obsessive way. The cows are grazed unwell, and we're patient. So

1 (7m 8s):
for me, it always starts with people and so it starts building a relationship with a grower or producer and then we can work out quality together because we know that that's the way that I mean, that's how you get the best of so, sometimes it can take years to figure out how you know, which which kind of strawberries grow in Ohio and how can we extend That season by a few weeks? So we have time to process them all as they come in. There's all sorts of cool stuff that you can do but you really have to have a good relationship with your farmers and Growers and your producers or like whiskey, you know, there's too much alcohol in the in the whiskey we couldn't add enough to ice cream, you know and still abide by the law. So we work with our whiskey Distillery to create a lower with alcohol whiskey so we can add a lot of whiskey to it. But those kinds of things all are based on relationships

2 (7m 50s):
I mean, but with that level of obsessiveness, right you're paying a premium for really high quality products. It also means that your ice cream is more expensive. I'm fine. Inez is expensive compared to a pine of you know, another brand right you it's very dense. There's a lot of ice cream that's packed in there. That's really high quality stuff. I mean presumably you your company can make a lot more money if the Pines were two dollars cheaper. Hmm.

1 (8m 16s):
Yeah, but I think that for us that passion is in growing the that's as a community, you know, it's that sort of community spirited business and making something truly beautiful that we're all really proud of I mean in our Our stores we have 39 stores and we have Pete this summer. We had 1,800 team members in the stores. And I think it's because mostly because those people who work in our stores are so proud of what we do that over-the-counter. It's sort of a natural they're naturally good at service because they're just proud of all of these back-end details that we will never probably be able to convey all of them over the counter, but they know that like it's that detail and the and the intention behind it that everyone feels and it's this crazy Magic.

1 (9m 1s):
But you feel it. I mean do you think

2 (9m 3s):
that there is a an argument to be made that you should pursue Perfection that you should pursue an uncompromising just absolutely no cutting Corners at all. I mean or

1 (9m 18s):
it's like having a garden. I mean, sometimes you're going to have a very Lush beautiful area and something's going to get a little bit withered. Hopefully nothing dies, you know, but that's what you're doing. You're moving your resources around me ultimately. We only have a limited amount of resources that we get to do this with and so you're constantly shifting.

2 (9m 36s):
Yeah, I mean you are in an entered a crowded space lot of ice cream makers a lot of people here working on baby clothes and different products where there's you know, there's a lot of competition. I mean, how do you really break through in a crowded

1 (9m 52s):
Market time? I mean, it's one person at a time. It's all on the street level. It's time and at start small and build sort of mentality. Already a business because you get to create I didn't know how to make the ice cream. I know now when we were younger and let's say we would have taken, you know, a whole bunch of money early and I don't think anybody would have given it to us anyway, but let's just say we could have done that. I wouldn't have had the time to work out these details and the things that I now know about ice cream. I needed all this time. I spent at least eight years boots on the ground just making ice cream and serving it before I ever started growing and that time is everything for me because I learned all of that. I mean I study art I didn't study ice cream. Tree and honestly, I failed every math class I ever took and Matt ice cream is math.

1 (10m 34s):
So I had to learn all that stuff and for us that's that's what's worked. And I think in ice cream when we look at what's happened in American ice cream for the last hundred years. There was like a new sort of Great American ice cream concept every like 10 years and then it kind of stopped at Ben & Jerry's and there's been a couple of other things that sort of were okay, but not great and now we're in another ice cream moment and I think it's because we've really devoted this like I'm to to building it into a real I mean a community that means something and it doesn't just mean something on paper. It feels a certain way and I think that like Ben & Jerry's I think that they did that it was a it was a moment in American history every industry and every business is so different, but I just don't think that you can just create an ice cream shop and Just Bounce onto the market.

1 (11m 23s):
It's just too complex of a of an industry and we've seen so many come and go over the years. It's a very hard Dairy is Is a complex industry, you know course, we always think everybody else's businesses are so much easier than ours, you know, and I'm like, I'm not doing Dairy again, but it's been amazing. It's been a joy and I'm an absolute evangelist for a Dairy

2 (11m 41s):
Farmers. I'm curious to get your take on growth, right because we you know, we sort of were fed this Mantra that growth is good and growth is important, but there are also consequences when it comes to growth and and challenges. So for a company like yours it means you've got a source more. Stop. It means you got to build more shops. It could mean that you lose control the quality as you have more stores and more shops. And I think most of your sales are still online and at and that stores right people buying pints at Whole Foods in other places rather than the scoop shops. But I mean how important is explosive growth. I mean, do you want Jenny's to be like Baskin-Robbins?

1 (12m 23s):
I mean, I love growing so much. I like the challenge of business and I love all of that. I don't think that my company would ever grow just because of growth. I don't think anyone in our company is motivated by that. I think it's been really fun to grow where people are buying our ice cream and then be able to offer them service ma'am various service driven as a person. It's very personal to me and so being able to open shops is really important to me in places, even when we're selling a lot of ice cream and Whole Foods for instance to be able to open a shop in that. You were we know people know about us and love something. We can offer that sort of service and that moment and you know, I do think that ice cream is a really lovely moment a place that you can get to know somebody else better.

1 (13m 3s):
And it's you know, just a special thing. So gosh, I have so many thoughts on this because I think that you can get better as you grow. Hmm, and that's been my experience and when we were really small and there's a sort of glow around the sort of mom-and-pop that sort of thing. I think especially in ice cream, but when we were small we were really limited by what we could buy. I mean we had to do an ice cream makes you couldn't get in a company to help us we couldn't get the dairy that we wanted to we couldn't get the milk that we we wanted and we knew we were surrounded by these Farms we couldn't get them outside of the system commingled with the other milk. Even our strawberry grower now gross fields for us and he's got his brother involved in the other guy down the street, you know, it was like one Flats at a time or whatever and so we really couldn't do much planning and then sometimes he wouldn't have enough or whatever so you actually feel like Up to this point we've gotten so much better as we've grown in terms of ice cream quality and definitely in terms of service and we have so much more to do and it takes resources to do

2 (14m 6s):
it. Mmm, as you know, the theme of The Summit this year is kindness and collaboration love that so much and I know that there's been many examples of that on your journey. Can you share just just one example of somebody who was kind or collaborative or just who? You when you started and and how that enabled you to get

1 (14m 26s):
here. I don't know how many of you are from smaller cities like me. I'm from Columbus, Ohio, but Columbus, Ohio. Yeah, I love this. I love Columbus very much. And my whole story is about asking for help my whole story. I mean I started with I always say nobody starts from nothing. We all have our brain Brawn and Buds and that's literally like how we started the company, but that Community came out for anything. Once I started to prove myself, so it wasn't immediate but once I started to prove that I was in it and that I would cared and that I was going to do this and it was going to be for a long time the community came out in a big way and at that point, you know, it becomes This Love Fest, like now I'm super committed.

1 (15m 7s):
I want to give back to the community. They're supporting me and I in a way love these sort of smaller cities see it in other cities as well where the whole city can kind of rally around a few businesses and companies that they love whereas sometimes you get lost in a bigger city has other advantages of being A big city with a new company, but that would that has been amazing, and I just would put that credit back on Columbus, and I love it to this day and will never leave for that reason. I mean I travel a lot, but I will always come back home because that's my place on Earth

2 (15m 37s):
Jenny Burton by our founder of Jeni's

1 (15m 39s):
Splendid. Thank you very, thank you.

2 (15m 43s):
That's Jenny Burton by our founder of

1 (15m 45s):
Jeni's Splendid ice creams. Jenni join me live on stage at

2 (15m 48s):
the how I built this Summit which happened in October and yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco will have more of my conversations from the summit over the next few weeks. So keep checking for updates. Thanks to Canada slim who produced this episode and rub teen are blue who wrote the music. I'm guy Roz and listening to how I built this. This is

1 (16m 17s):
NPR.