2 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business? They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business. Hey everyone. So today we've got another one of my conversations from the how I built this Summit that happened in San Francisco last October. And you know in the world of startups one of the most difficult moves to pull off is a pivot to maneuver out of your first idea into something that might have more potential and Stewart Butterfield.

2 (42s):
He pulled this off not once but twice about seven years ago out of the ashes of a failed video game Stewart launched slack and office collaboration tool that now has 12 million daily users. But before slack back in 2004 Stewart was struggling to get traction. Chin with another video game called game never-ending you end up shutting that one down too, but out of that failure, he was able to launch a photo-sharing site called Flickr which he sold just a year later for around 20 million dollars. So when I sat down with Stewart on stage, I asked him about both of those pivots starting with the first one from game never-ending to flicker there was a point and you talked about this in the podcast where you had to decide decide whether to drop all of this work on this computer game like more than a year.

2 (1m 35s):
I think two years of work on this game and pivot to the photo-sharing site and there was a debate internal debate. I wonder how did you know that that was the right thing to do because our Instinct would tell us to push forward and to keep going right? Like that's what we think we're supposed to do to just carry on and March forward.

1 (1m 58s):
Yeah. There's a lot of advice that's just persevere. Grit resilience got to keep going in the face of adversity over and over but there is definitely a point where you either, you know, it can't work or kind of like the reverse manifesting of I don't believe anymore that this could work which makes it very unlikely if the person leading the project doesn't believe it can work. Its it would be a weird fluke for it to actually to work out but we were just out of money and it would have been a much more difficult complex. Eject to complete the game would have taken us a minimum of another year but probably realistic and closer to two more years and we didn't have that kind of time. Whereas Flickr we figured we can get a version of this out in a couple months and it actually was I don't remember the exact dates anymore.

1 (2m 44s):
But it's sometime in December 2002 that we decided to do it and early February 2003 it

2 (2m 51s):
launched. Hmm. So you guys end up selling Flickr to Yahoo. And you described yourself as briefly internet famous. You actually were like on the cover of Newsweek magazine with some other people at one point, which I'm assuming got you some attention to allow you to kind of think about the next project you decide to go back and start another company that was going to be a computer game called glitch. What was driving you then? I mean did you think okay now I've failed, you know, I failed the first time now I know how to do it,

1 (3m 24s):
right we can talk about the reasons that we used to convince ourselves that it would work this time good there is actually a lot of realistic stuff there the cost of Hardware so servers in the background had fallen by at least 90% like and a bunch of things changed by a factor of 10. The number of people online Changed by a factor of 10 the availability of great open source software tools, but stepping back when I got in line in 1992 and I grew up in Victoria British Columbia, which is a pretty small town. I mean actually provincial it's on the edge of the continent and then it's on an island. So it feels very remote and cut off from the rest. World's your kind of an observer and when I got to college I got an account on the school's Unix machine and that meant I had access to the internet and this is like maybe six or nine months before the webbed really started to take off.

1 (4m 15s):
So the internet at that time was a thing called News Group which was a hierarchical directory of kind of discussion boards for more or less everything in the world. So hugely popular in the scientific community and academic communities, but also just recreational in fact kind. Mind-blowing but wreck dot music. G Dead The Grateful Dead newsgroup was the most popular thing on the entire internet was like in terms of traffic. It was the Netflix of its day just like the text postings going back and forth and I just really remember that as being one of the most revelatory mind-blowing experiences of my life that even though we were on the edge of the world, it felt like and kind of really outside of everything that was really happening that could connect anyone and that The kind of the possibilities for computer and Technology to facilitate human interaction to me are endlessly fascinating and I think when we look back tens of thousands of years to this time, it will seem as significant as the development of written language because it just allows this accretive knowledge allows the accessibility allows this instant communication and coordination between people and we're still like 1% of the way into exploring the

2 (5m 28s):
possibilities. So I mean, This glitch right? This is a beautiful game. You raise money around it. You had great developers you convince people to move across the country work on this what happened

1 (5m 38s):
just didn't so in this case. We had the money. In fact, we had money left over when we decided to shut it down but it was apparent that it wouldn't work. And I think this is a if there's one thing that's an actual like practical lesson for entrepreneurs in all of this history besides the sometimes pivots work. It's it's heart if it's really really hard to explain your at an enormous disadvantage. And so what this the way games are marketed generally is there's kind of a two by two Matrix and in one axis, it's the kind of veneer of looks like the World War II or post-apocalyptic sci-fi or looks like Dungeons and Dragons or it looks like Get you or something like that, like cutesy cartoon.

1 (6m 19s):
There's that the flavor of it and then there's the the mechanics of the game first person shooter in real time strategy and puzzle games and stuff like that and games are marketed as like their position on this grid. So it's a World War II first person shooter game and instantly people can see like at least I understand what that is, and maybe I'm interested in and maybe I'm not we tried to sell the world a massively multiplayer game with no. Combat kids of Cooperative. It was kind of Monty Python meets. Dr. Seuss surreal absurd. Literally. This is that like the game with you would milk butterflies and you like collect milk.

1 (6m 59s):
You would squeeze eggs squeeze chickens to get eggs. Anyway, it was it was very

2 (7m 8s):
how did you raise money or around that?

1 (7m 11s):
It was I think the fact that we had been successful before right plan, but is also right at this. Interesting juncture where it was around the year that Android came out it was around the year that iPhones actually started to take off and suddenly there was this massive shift in people's discretionary internet time from desktop and laptop computers to mobiles and we had made a bet on flash as a technology for delivering the game, which wasn't going to work on mobiles and I think in the end that that really was the nail in the coffin if it hadn't been for that, I think it would have been worth trying a little bit more. But I was committed and every day I came in with optimism and I was sure that this next thing that we were going to try was going to work and then we did it and it didn't work.

1 (7m 56s):
But by the end I think the kind of technological dead end. We had find ourselves going down the fact that it was desktop only in a world that was going increasingly mobile the fact that it was already so hard to explain, you know, made it really tough despite. The fact that there was a super committed very enthusiastic audience. I just lost faith and Lies then like once I had done that it was now

2 (8m 19s):
impossible did was that I mean we hear about you know, the Relentless optimism of entrepreneurs and and and it sounds like you inside you were actually had a lot of self-doubt and that voice got louder and louder until it got to a point where you were basically saying I need to level with you Stuart. This is not working when you told your closest colleagues that were they shocked were they like but yesterday you were so optimistic what's going

1 (8m 45s):
on? There's definitely a little bit of this and so So I told the board and the co-founders, and there's some argument back and forth about and there's definitely a belief that we should persist, but I think once I was out everyone realized that it wasn't going to work and the next day or probably two days later we told the whole company, so we called an all-hands meeting. We were based in Vancouver and here in San Francisco, and there was one employee who had moved from my hometown Victoria, British, Columbia to Vancouver. He just had a new baby is I think two years old. He left his in-laws who were helping take care of the baby and bought a new house and moved to this new city. And when I started telling everyone they were going to shut it down.

1 (9m 27s):
I just like happen to be facing where he was sitting and locked eyes with him. And I knew that I had just like sold him on moving over and making this massive change in his life and now couple months later. I was telling them he didn't have a job anymore and I was really hard like that was really hard. I mean, I think that the feeling of Of having let down all of these people to a lesser extent having that down the the investors but that wasn't as much of a concern having left analysts people because there was thousands and thousands of people who love this game or spending all their free time. They'd form these really important relationships. And any of you who have participated in online communities, especially in the early days where the online community was the Nexus of all of these friendships and all these relationships when they disappeared that's it that people can say we're going to make a Facebook group and we're going to catch up this way.

1 (10m 12s):
We're gonna do this thing or that thing, but it's gone. Almost like a little they obviously a very small scale but like like a little civilization going out of existence and I felt really bad about that. Yeah. So in some sense there was like those were motivations to just keep going just to pretend like what does problems sure and and don't have to face up to this the way that it ended I think was was really as positive as it could be because we had money left because we didn't wait till he used up every dollar we receive able to take a little bit of time and work with everyone who lost their job. So there's 45 people the company and 8 of them were going to stay on to work on slack.

1 (10m 53s):
So for the other 37 people we did kind of career coaching. We will reference letters. We set up interviews for them. We ended up getting everyone a job and in most cases a better job than what they had. And I think that Goodwill got us a long way,

2 (11m 8s):
you know, I think about pivots so often because some of my favorite episodes were about pivots I mean, Tofurkey Seth tibbitts started out selling Tempe and he pivoted towards Topher keys. I'm Stacy Madison, you know, it started out as a pita cart but rolled up Pita sandwiches, they sold pita chips because they add extra peat at the end of the day and they cut them up and hand them out to people and eventually people were coming to the to the cart not for the rolled-up sandwiches, but for the pita chips, is there a way I mean, is there ever a way to know when it's time to abandon this thing that you love

1 (11m 42s):
and Totally shift Direction. Yeah, so I mean that's probably more survivorship bias rather than I have some special talent or ability to identify those situations. I just happened to do it twice kind of like someone who won the lottery advising you on which numbers to pick but because this game was so weird and so hard to explain it was much harder to get into people's heads and you really need to be able to get like purchase in someone's mind which is why you hear things like Jaws meet Star Wars or it's Uber for whatever because people already have those Concepts in their head and they can kind of put it together to figure out what this thing is with Flickr.

1 (12m 23s):
I think we had a real disadvantage because you never really explained what it was or what it was for with a game. It was very hard to identify. I think we still face that as a major challenge for slack because it's like a brand-new category of software that doesn't really replace anything specific that you were using before. So part of it is is this an idea that I can make clear enough. Tough for someone else such that that person can go on and explain it to someone else when I'm not there that's a little bit complicated grammatically. But what I mean is like can can other people be advocates for you can other people explain it and the idea is where that's possible. I think I have a lot more possibility than the ones

2 (13m 2s):
were and its lack is easy to explain.

1 (13m 4s):
Yeah, well hard for us, but but you can we actually argue about this all the time. So if I'm this happened in real life, it was kind of jammed up on the on the plane. That gives taking everyone a long time to sit down and so I was chatting with the flight attendant and she said what do you do? I work in software. Oh what company slack? What's that? And there's this critical moment where I realized I was going to say it's a messaging app used by businesses. But if you go to our website it until two months ago. It said imagine what your team can do and then now it says like whatever work you can do. You can do it better with slack or something like that and I realized like we really should probably tell people what it is.

1 (13m 44s):
Because people are taking time out of their day to come to the website and they want to understand it and there's this mrs. Like restaurant websites on the one hand I've ever been to a restaurant website. I want the hours of their open their address the phone number or the menu. There's really no other reason to go you go to a restaurant website and this like this photo like starts to fade in and McKenna Ken Burns effects, and there's a meal and the music starts autoplay. In and you're not allowed to use the menu like a thing to navigate the website until all this crap is finished and the people who make restaurant websites and the owners of the restaurants who commissioned them must have gone to other restaurant websites before and be frustrated.

1 (14m 30s):
So I tweeted this years ago is like what's the name for this phenomenon? Whereby like it's definitely not what anyone wants and yet you people persist in providing it and someone came up with the owners delusion like your thing because it's so important. To you seems like something that everyone else will really be interested in like you're so into the style of food you've created and this photographing took of the dish was so like came out so perfectly that you really in it's like people who tell you about their kids activities for a little bit too long. That's a real tough one. Like it can be really tough to be out there hustling and if you're just completely incorrect about the degree to which Someone else cares and like how how quickly you need to get to the point.

1 (15m 18s):
It's yeah, it can be like the the death of the business. So definitely try and slowly over my career to bias towards things that are a little bit easier to

2 (15m 26s):
explain and that people care about yes Stewart Butterfield founder of slack. Thank you, sir. Thank you. That's Stewart Butterfield co-founder of Flickr and founder of slack Stewart. Join me live on stage at the how I built this Summit which happened in October and yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco will have a few more of my conversations from the summit over the next month or so, so keep an eye out for them and thanks to Kansas Lim who produced this episode and love team Arab Louis who wrote the music. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this.

2 (16m 9s):
This is NPR.