2 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business? They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business. So today we've got another one of my live on stage conversations from the how I built this Summit that happened in San Francisco back in October and many of the people sitting in the audience were and are super focused on a single idea and idea. They're hoping to turn into a successful business.

2 (42s):
Well, today's guest Marcia Kilgore started out that way to one idea one company called Bliss a skincare. She wound up selling for tens of millions of dollars. But as you may remember when she told her story of the podcast a few years ago, Marcia did not stop there. She went on to launch for more successful Brands soap and Glory fit flop SuperDuper and beauty pie. So when she sat down with me on stage at the summit, I was really curious to find out where she gets all of her ideas not to mention her incredible energy and optimism. One of the things I remember when you and the podcast you told me that that you love rubbing the sticks together, right?

2 (1m 25s):
I'm you love making things. Do you do you know where that comes from?

1 (1m 32s):
Hmm. That's a really good question. Where does rubbing the sticks come together from? Yeah. I think it's probably epigenetic. I'm you know from a Polish and Irish family and they were farmers. So I guess I'm somewhat of a farmer. I don't think you can completely lose but his from your history and I just I feel very comfortable working hard and struggling and that's what makes me happy and makes me feel really fulfilled every day to be solving a problem to be digging in the earth. You know, whatever that Earth is and trying to figure out how to grow something.

2 (2m 2s):
I mean, there's so many companies successful companies. You have founded sold some of them. You still run and I mean, do you are you always thinking about the next thing,

1 (2m 13s):
you know got what's really interesting and I think what's really important for all of us to do is to keep adding Points of Light, you know, and big point of light is your show right every week to just listen again, listen to them over and over again, listen, five times their points of light and then read as much as you can and when you read and you add those points of light you create a picture for yourself that is kind of like, you know, the lights on your Christmas tree if you have a Christmas tree right there all and when you get a bunch of them up there, you can suddenly see the shape of the tree right you see either a new Yeah, or you can see the way through a problem and you have A New Path and it is by adding more points.

1 (2m 55s):
So, you know, normally they say in sales if you haven't managed to sell something to somebody it's because you haven't explained to them why they need that product that you are selling. You haven't done it enough to connect those dots for them. So I think it's the same thing when you're trying to solve a business challenge or to come up with a new idea that might pass that so what test I have something that I call the So what test which is, you know you explain your idea in one simple sentence and then ask yourself. So what and if you can't answer so what in one simple sentence then you don't have it yet. And you may need to add some more points of

2 (3m 31s):
light. I mean, I think it's anyone who's heard your episode or who's talk to you a little bit knows that you're not motivated by money. I mean you sold all these companies you've made a lot of money. You don't need to work you're motivated by It comes bearing witness get the competitors who you said this on the show. I want one thing. I remember is you said the idea of seeing a product that I had thought about that wasn't mine drives me crazy would drive me crazy

1 (3m 58s):
like yeah, it's if you if you thought of something and then somebody moved out but it happens

2 (4m 2s):
happen to all of us. We thought of something and idea and then you know, you see it like two years later at Target.

1 (4m 7s):
Yeah, right. That's it's sad to think. Oh, I didn't move on that one. It could have been

2 (4m 10s):
mine is that I mean does that idea just drive you so crazy that you

1 (4m 14s):
have You know really that the good ideas, you know, I'll have like 10 a day, but the good ones are the ones that you know, the nine of them kind of go away and one of them sticks and you think oh, I really gotta do that and then you kind of start to tell friends and and if you're a real entrepreneurial type, you probably see the vision the most and you don't see the data and the details until maybe later. So you're up here and these people down here can't see it and that's because you haven't met be connected all the dots for them yet. It doesn't mean that the idea is not good at the same time. I'm if that's a terrible idea, you know invite that criticism. This is the best thing that you can

2 (4m 50s):
get. So you do talk about it with people. You don't keep it secret.

1 (4m 54s):
No, I will you know, it depends where we are in a patenting process sure, you know, if we want to have to keep something secret because we think there might be a competitor that comes up, you know, really quickly. We haven't built enough of a first mover Advantage then I won't talk about it too much. Yeah, and and if you have an idea like that, you know to get non-disclosure agreements anybody just starting out right get download one from the internet. Just give it to people stop them talking about your idea. At least if you can't afford a lawyer

2 (5m 19s):
so one of the really cool things about your story is I mean, you moved to New York you were 18 you were hoping to go to college but you didn't have the money to do it and you were a bodybuilder as a young woman. You are a fitness instructor and that's really how you started out and then you got into skincare and you opened up your little 200 square foot booth in SoHo in the in the 90s and built this incredible business you've now had Success with Cosmetics with shoes with soap. I mean you didn't go to business school. You didn't have the formal fancy degrees that some other people do which is awesome. I mean, it's so inspiring right how have you known that these ideas were going to work

1 (6m 7s):
actually what you need to understand is that there are has anyone done Myers-Briggs. Yeah. Okay, it's good. It's good to How your brain thinks because your brain is one of what 16 types of brains. So the type of brain that I've got. I'm an INTP. So it's the blue printer. So I'm a typical kind of visionary thinker so I can see without necessarily explaining to you know, some people can do math without doing all the work in between. Yeah, that's like me with the idea and then I have to figure out I do the work in between but I can usually tell Well after a while and that's just a gift.

1 (6m 47s):
I guess it's very whoever I mean have you ever

2 (6m 50s):
had an idea that you tried and pursued for a while that you realize didn't wasn't going to

1 (6m 56s):
work. Not really.

2 (6m 57s):
Wow, really? That's amazing.

1 (6m 59s):
Not a big one. I mean, you know at one point someone wanted us to do a men's line offshoot of soap and glory and that don't really work as men didn't buy Cosmetics at the time. It wasn't makeup, but they wanted to spend 99 cents on a shower. Gel and I couldn't make it that cheap. I didn't want to make it that cheap. Yeah. I could have but I just where is no joy in that for me. So we you know, it was sort of a little offshoot that someone thought this would be a great expansion and it didn't really go but otherwise no, I don't think so. I think I think about them for a long time and that's something else that I remember learning from a woman. I think her name is Kristina Brown. She used to run sacks, and she said, you know, if you just sit for an hour every day don't look at your email and put the problem you're trying to solve down in front of you and actually just think about About that problem and map it out.

1 (7m 47s):
Maybe put it on a wall and map out the pros and the cons and how you might be able to get here and what will happen. If you do this, you're like the choice diagram. Yeah, you probably solve the problem or see if there are too many insurmountable obstacles or see if the things that you haven't thought about but we don't do that right because I don't know. I mean there will be people in here who are real realist. But then also if you're somebody who's quite optimistic, which is a requirement to be an entrepreneur, you have to be kind of Optimistic to a fault you won't want to look at the hurdles that may be in the way so actually sitting down and mapping things out will tell you, you know, can you get over some of these things and and it'll give you a little bit more of a realistic perspective on what you're going to be up against because any time that you start a new business it is like pushing a boulder up the hill anyone feel that?

1 (8m 39s):
Yeah. Yeah, right and you think okay and to push this boulder up the hill and eventually the boulder Will Roll by itself, but the boulder sometimes feels like it's rolling by itself for about how long like nine hours. Yeah, right and then you have to start pushing the boulder again. Yes, you have to make sure mrs. If I started with a business plan because my goal would be to make money there just wouldn't be enough passion for me to push the boulder. Yeah. I'm curious

2 (9m 5s):
about this idea of scale, you know, obviously the companies that we've had on the show are big companies, they've scaled but I've had conversations and have had messages from people saying look, I'm scale is great. But we kind of I don't know we celebrate it without talking about the virtues of just creating a sustainable company that can sustain a family or ten families or 50

1 (9m 29s):
families. Yeah, right. I mean it's all relative. Yeah, what scale is to you? I think it's the same thing. It's kind of when you learn to ski right first you're on the bunny slope and then it's really boring to be on the bunny slope. So you have to go to the green. Yeah, and then you have to

2 (9m 45s):
go to the blue

1 (9m 46s):
right and then you got to go to the red and then you have to go the black

2 (9m 49s):
but if you do you think about like when you you know now with beauty pie or your you know, the next company there the next seven companies you start how important is it to you strategically to make it really big.

1 (10m 3s):
Hmm. I don't think about it at the beginning. I will think about an idea as whether it's interesting enough for me sort of psychologically. I suppose. Is it enough of a challenge? To keep me interested in it because if it's not I will kind of get bored and then I won't build it. Yeah, that's me. I think any size of business. Listen when it comes down to it. What's the most important thing happiness? Right? So if you're happy with a small business where you're not stressed all day, that's perfectly great. And then if you're not happy unless your business is big and growing and you're taking over the world. That's great for you, too. There's no judgment. You just want to be happy, whatever it is you're doing.

1 (10m 45s):
And that'll change if you're doing you know your first business what might make you happy probably gets different when you're doing your second or your third eye or 10th

2 (10m 53s):
what you're saying is it's not about the money. It's not about the notoriety. It's about just tackling something that is personally interesting and that you can make

1 (11m 3s):
sustainable but you can make sustainable. I think that makes a difference. Also. I'm older now, right? So the older you get the more you realize that you want to do something that really has / S and that changes life for people for the better. I've always loved making people happy. So most of my brands are kind of filled with humor and some way because it's offering people a treat or a bit of lightness or break when they need it. And at the same time now, there are so many other factors that we have to look into like, you know, is it sustainable for the Earth are the things that your packaging with recyclable? Is there plastic that's going to end up in the ocean.

1 (11m 44s):
How can you ship this? Lighter people want to use glass instead of plastic glasses heavier. So how do you you know, there are a lot of moving parts now and actually it's a really interesting time to be in our business because there's such a tremendous shift everything is moving so fast that you have to be able to be really open not defensive customers will attack you all the time, especially with social media, right? So you will get on slots and onslaughts of people criticizing you and you have to actually take it and thank you know what listen to them because they're telling you what to do. They're telling you. What they want and that's one of the best pieces of advice that I ever had Well, yeah, if you

2 (12m 21s):
were sitting in this audience, you know in the early 90s, you got to New York. It was a different New York. You were on your own. I mean if you when you were just starting out. What do you what do you wish you would have known then that you you know

1 (12m 33s):
now okay lots of things.

2 (12m 36s):
All right, let's go. Yeah.

1 (12m 39s):
Okay. So number one surround yourself with trust and positive energy openness and don't be defensive. Serve and write everything down because when you write things down and then you have actionable against them but moves you to a next step and it's sort of a measurable Next Step. So that's something everyone should work on. It's a marathon not a Sprint right? Sometimes you start a business and you think okay and two years. We're going to sell this for 50 million dollars above it, you know, four and a half years later. You're still you're still jogging. So remember it's always a marathon and you will get there, but you know, it can take 10. Years of 17 years. I think Starbucks was going for 17 years before anybody really heard of it.

1 (13m 20s):
So don't think you're going to turn something around unless you're really lucky every idea you have has to pass the sowhat test. So have someone ask you so what and then explain so what in one sentence if you can't and it's not cool like what's cool about that what's new about that go back and work on your idea before you spend a lot of time and effort on that never sell something that you wouldn't Buy That's an easy one. Right? But related to that is the best decision is always a decision that increases your customers trust. Has anybody been in a position where you have to make a decision? You're thinking. I don't know if this is the best but let's launch it.

1 (14m 0s):
Anyway, you will come to these situations where the products not really ready or there's like a mild design flaw and you think well, you know, like 23% of people might notice this but and you're not really happy with it feels like an albatross around your neck always think long-term. Because cleaning up a mess is way more expensive than waiting for a little while, and it's exhausting. What else about that you get what you give if somebody asks you for a favor take the time and do it, right? If you can help someone do it because one day you don't know where they are. They may have really had a tremendous amount of success and they can come and pull you up and they will remember so take that time no matter how busy or stressed or whatever you are and do not get up in the morning to be

2 (14m 48s):
average. Love it. I love it Marcia

1 (14m 51s):
Kilgore founder too many companies. Amazing. Thank you. Thank you.

2 (14m 57s):
That's Marcia Kilgore. She's the founder of five companies including Bliss and beauty pie. She joins me live on stage at the how I built this Summit which happened in October at yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco. We're gonna have more of my conversations from the summit over the next few weeks. So keep checking for updates and thanks to JC Howard who produced this episode and from Teen Arab Louis who wrote the music I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this this is NPR.