0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor GoDaddy, making a different future starts with you. Go, daddy helps you create, sell, and get found online so you can create change or build an empire stark different@godaddy.com. Hey everyone, welcome to another special edition of how I built this I'm guy Roz today. We're releasing the second main stage interview from our, how I built this summit, which happened virtually back in may. And today's episode is from my conversation about leadership with Bernie brown. She's a professor author and host of the podcast unlocking us. And if you've seen Bernays Ted talks or listen to her podcasts or read her books, you might be familiar with her recommended ingredients for good leadership, bravery trust, gratitude, and of course, vulnerability over the past 10 years, her research and ideas about vulnerability have really changed the way many people think about what makes a good leader instead of a weakness.

0 (1m 1s):
It can actually be your greatest strength, but before Bernay became known for her research around vulnerability, she grew up in the suburbs of Houston, Texas, where she says vulnerability. Wasn't something that was valued at all.

1 (1m 16s):
I remember very early thinking to myself, if I can understand the connection between people's thinking and their emotions and how they're going to behave or show up, that is going to be better for me, that gives me some predictive control over environments that I'm not comfortable. And I mean, I, from a very early age, couldn't figure out where I belonged or fit. I couldn't figure out who were my people am. I love my family. My family loved me, but I was clearly different than them. I was an introvert. We didn't have that language back then. And so, you know, if you wanted to eat at a restaurant, you need to look the weight around the eye in order. And if you weren't comfortable doing that, you must not be hungry.

1 (1m 57s):
Like it was a tough kind of a tough Texas upbringing, zero vulnerability, ironically, but maybe not.

0 (2m 4s):
You you've written about, about this and, and about your kind of rebellious teenage years, and then your twenties, when you struggled with, with alcohol and eventually you got sober and you joined AA and you describe both your, your time as an alcoholic, and then getting sober as this major time of vulnerability in your life or discovering vulnerability beginning to discover it. What do you remember about becoming attuned to vulnerability?

1 (2m 39s):
I remember going to an AA meeting for the first time. I mean, I'm just two weeks ago just celebrated 25 years sober. So this was a long time ago. And I remember someone telling me after the meeting, I went to dinner afterwards with like a quick sponsor. You're supposed to make, I'm a rule follower. And she's like, listen, you need to drinking. You need to quit working so much. You need to quit emotionally eating. You have like a poopoo platter of addictions, just a little bit of everything. And I was like, holy shit, what am I going to do with my time? I'm like, what's left, but I just kind of tried to do all of them at one time, a little bit.

1 (3m 19s):
What smoking quit drinking, got a great therapist. And I think what I realized is probably I would have ended up in a vulnerability anonymous meeting had that been an option. I just think anything, anything that I could use to outrun or outsmart feeling uncertain and at risk and out of control was my thing. Of

0 (3m 46s):
Course, everyone watching knows that vulnerability became really the central theme, a central theme in your research shame as well at the, at the university of Houston where you have a, an academic appointment. And you began early on in your research, going back to when you were doing your PhD, you began to see how, how critical it was for leaders for all of us, really to understand the powerful emotions that play out in the decisions we make. And basically you came to understand or realize that vulnerability isn't a weakness, but a strength.

0 (4m 27s):
How did you come to that view?

1 (4m 29s):
You know, it's, it's been a really weird journey. And I think almost all of us were raised to believe that it's really important to be courageous with our lives, but at the same time, most of us were taught that vulnerability is weakness. So on one hand, we're supposed to be brave. And on the other hand, we're supposed to never be vulnerable, you know, and vulnerability has, you know, we just crossed, you know, just crossed the 500,000 pieces of data mark and our research. And wow, vulnerability has a very simple definition driven by the data it's uncertainty risk and emotional exposure.

1 (5m 11s):
So vulnerability is the emotion that we experience when we're we feel risk we're at risk, we're emotionally exposed or we're uncertain the, the really hard part. And I think this is part of the midlife reckoning. So everyone from their, you know, late thirties, till we die, at some point, we've got to reconcile that we will never truly be courageous if we're never willing to be vulnerable. I think when you help people understand what vulnerability is and what it isn't, and then we reflect on courageous moments in our lives. That's when we truly understand that vulnerability is the path to courage there.

1 (5m 56s):
You know, it's the measure of courage. In fact, if I wanted to give you an instrument to measure your level of courage, I would literally be assessing your capacity for vulnerability. You know, it's

0 (6m 7s):
So interesting to me because if you looked at how we assessed leadership in the nineties, for example, especially in corporate America, people looked to Jack Welch, you know, this hard driving fist pounding leader and not to disparage Jack Welch. But I think with all due respect, he would not be held up as a Paragon today in corporate America. Because today it is all about transparency and foam durability and meeting people where they are. But I wonder how you think that transition began to happen. Cause it's a real, relatively recent phenomenon.

1 (6m 49s):
Yeah. I mean, it's, you know, I wish I could say it's because we're a kinder, gentler people, but that's not the case. The case is really straightforward. It's performance is the issue. You know, the well-chosen approach to performance is hire fire, hire fire. And there's just carnage from that, but there's not just people's lives that are ruined. There's no consistent, predictable performance, you know? So I wish I, again, I wish I could say, well, we've come to understand people better. And I think we have, but at least in tandem is the fact that people are our most valuable resource.

1 (7m 35s):
I mean, people without people, we've got nothing. And so you have to think about, you know, what makes people work and what makes, what makes us work is feeling trust, feeling valued, understanding how, what we do everything everyday ties to something greater. And so I think it's a combination hopefully of understanding people and valuing people more. But it's also about performance. How do

0 (8m 4s):
You, I mean, there's no question that, and you know this through our interviews, I, I ask when people come onto how I built this before they come on, we do a call and I say, I'm going to need you to surrender. You know, this is going to be a different kind of interview. We want to have a car seat in the cockpit of your mind and, and retrace your life story. And that's going to require vulnerability. It's not easy for everybody. It's easier for some people it's easier for maybe me and maybe you and maybe some people watching, but how, how do you start? How does somebody start to, to do that?

1 (8m 45s):
Well, the first question is what's the fear. If you, if we want to talk about the opposite of courage as armor, what is the armor? What is driving the self protection? I mean, it is really one of the developmental milestones of mid-life to really understand how did we self protect as children? Because we didn't belong. We didn't fit in. Things were hard. We didn't get everything we needed. What kind of armor did we find when we were young to self protect?

1 (9m 27s):
And at some point in midlife, it is our task to say, what no longer serves? What kind of armor am I wearing? What kind of behaviors am I engaging in that were self-protective at one point, but now are getting in the way of me growing into who to being the parent, the professional, the partner that I want to be, because it's not just leadership and courage. You know, vulnerability is the birthplace of love of belonging, of intimacy, of innovation, of creativity, accountability, the most vulnerable emotion we experience is joy.

1 (10m 13s):
Joy can be almost terrifying for us because we're so afraid that if we let ourselves lean into it or feel it, we will be sucker punched by pain or disappointment. Yes. Do you know what I'm talking about? Yes. Yeah. A hundred percent. Yeah. I call it for voting joy. I ask parents all the time, you know, how many parents have ever stood over their child while they were sleeping and thought, oh my God, I love you. Like, I didn't know it was possible. And then in that split second, pictured something horrific happening to their child. You know? And the answer is about 95% of parents because we trick ourselves into believing that if we dress, we Hearst tragedy, then when something bad happens, it will hurt us last.

1 (11m 0s):
And the truth is that you can't prepare for that, but you can certainly squander joy. And that in itself is very risky because it's actually joy that helps us build resilience, moments of joy. It is, it's such a measure of how, how well we can handle our own vulnerability. So now, you know what, I'll tell you for people listening and watching us tonight, that the antidote to that is actually we found in the research, the folks who can lean fully into joy have one thing in common.

1 (11m 43s):
My hypothesis was spirituality, but I was wrong. It was actually gratitude. Wow. So in, in those moments where we experienced joy, some of us use it as kind of a warning system to practice, to dress rehearse tragedy, but others in a more mindful way, use that little quiver to remind themselves to be grateful for what's in front of them.

0 (12m 8s):
I keep thinking about, there are moments. I think we all experiences, whether we're parents or as leaders, where, where something amazing is happening. You know what I see this on, on our show where I look at the team and they're just so incredible. They're so good at what they do. They're working at the highest levels. And I do feel that incredible sense of gratitude. And those are the moments where I'm actually operating at my peak as a leader.

1 (12m 37s):
I mean, that is, that is the most beautiful way to put it. I see this all the time and leaders I work with, they refuse to celebrate small moments and small achievements out of the fear that if they do that, people will take their foot off the gas. If we stop and celebrate, and we're grateful at this moment, people will slow down. Well, we don't have a shred of evidence. We have zero data that show when we recognize people, when we're grateful, when we celebrate a moment that people stop working hard. In fact, all the data say the opposite. The data say that when we slow down, show gratitude, celebrate small moments.

1 (13m 19s):
It actually prevents burnout and people redoubled their commitment to work.

0 (13m 28s):
And it's, it's such an important point making the connection between joy and vulnerability, because it's not a connection that that many of us make. But I think a lot of people think of showing vulnerability is like a circle where you're all crying and everybody is hugging each other. It's that's not what it's about. That's not what you're talking about.

1 (13m 48s):
No, in fact, I'll tell you this really short story. So I'm giving a talk to a group of relatively new CEOs who have received funding and I'm getting ready to kind of walk out. And a guy comes up to me and says, oh my God, I'm drinking the Kool-Aid on vulnerability. And so that's my, that's my first flag. My first bike is awful metaphor and yikes. And so I'm kind of stealing myself for what's coming next. And he said, here's what I'm going to do. I'm just going to lean into vulnerability. And I'm just going to tell, I'm going to tell the investors, I'm going to tell my employees, I don't know what I'm doing.

1 (14m 30s):
I'm in over my head. And we are bleeding money. And I kept thinking he had to have gone to the bathroom or something during the part where I said like vulnerability minus boundaries is not vulnerability. It's, you know, it's oversharing, it's like desperation. And I said, he said, what do you think will happen if I do that? And I said, I think you'll never see another dollar of funding. And I think that the employees that followed you into this business, that you're so passionate about will feel completely betrayed and probably hate your guts. But the thing about this story that I think is important is with whom do you share this?

1 (15m 13s):
You know, vulnerability is not disclosure. Vulnerability is the skill and ability to lean into uncertainty and risk and emotional exposure in a way that allows you to maintain productive, forward thinking strategy. And so he needs to sit across from someone and get help, but it's probably not the investors at this point. And it's definitely not the employees does.

0 (15m 43s):
I mean, in order for a leader to show the kind of vulnerability that is necessary to perform at, at a high level, I imagine the environment in which they operate has to be an environment of mutual trust, which is not always the case in all workplaces.

1 (16m 6s):
You know, a lot of times folks will call me in to come work with the leadership team for very specific reasons. Sometimes there's a real lack of creativity and innovation happening. Sometimes people are going through a company's going through massive change digital transformation. So the first question I always ask, I, first of all, I never asked the leaders. I always talked to people in the organization. Is this a culture where armor is either required or rewarded? And at the answer is, oh God, yes, we have to wear armor here. We have to wear armor here to keep our jobs. We have to wear armor here to survive, or yes, of course they reward exhaustion and perfectionism.

1 (16m 52s):
And you know, of course that, then it's really easy for me to go to leadership and say, this is a culture change project. This isn't me talking to your folks. This is you changing the culture. And so, and this is especially true. When we start talking about women, black employees, people of color, where is it safe to be vulnerable or as a woman, am I already fighting a fight every single day where I have to keep my armor on because of how I'm treated. And then the hard thing is like, you know, if there's a fear of failure, if there's a fear of mistakes, that's a choice, but do not expect high levels of innovation and creativity because those things are mutually exclusive.

1 (17m 41s):
When

0 (17m 41s):
We come back in just a moment more from Bernay brown about vulnerability and privilege and how trauma can impact our ability to be stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, GoDaddy, making a different future starts with you. That's why GoDaddy does more than help. You find a name you can create, sell, and get found online. So any small business can be a driving force to create change, or build an empire.

0 (18m 25s):
So whatever it is you have in mind that will help make a different future, find everything you need to get started@godaddy.com because the future isn't decided yet it's up to us to make it happen. Start different@godaddy.com. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Amazon key in garage delivery has arrived. It's a convenient, easy way to get Amazon deliveries and keep them safe. Drivers gain your packages to get one time verified access to your garage and place your deliveries inside in garage. Delivery is free for prime members and you'll get a $40 Amazon credit with your first order terms and conditions apply.

0 (19m 6s):
Visit amazon.com/h IBT to learn more. This message comes from NPR sponsor Turo, a global car sharing marketplace, empowering entrepreneurs of all sizes to start and scale a small business earning up to $10,000 annually per car in the U S with some hosts pulling in six figures, sharing multiple cars. Turo provides an easy to use platform and mobile app protection plans to cover vehicle damage insurance from Liberty surplus insurance corporation, and more visit <inaudible> dot com and click become a host or download the app and list your car.

2 (19m 47s):
NPR has put in money. Summer school is now in session. Everything you want to know about investing from expert guest professors, new classes, every Wednesday til labor day, when it money podcast fee.

0 (20m 8s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross, and you're listening to an excerpt for my conversation about leadership with Bernie brown, from the, how I built this virtual summit held back in may. And Bernice says it's not always easy for people to be vulnerable specifically when we consider the role of trauma, the

1 (20m 27s):
First and probably most devastating casualty of trauma is the ability or willingness to be vulnerable. When we survive trauma, either a one-time trauma or ongoing trauma, vulnerability becomes very precarious, very difficult, if not impossible. And I see this a lot when working with veterans, you know, veterans are like vulnerability equals death. Yeah. Like we literally say secure the vulnerable perimeter or we'll die. And now I'm home. And I can't be in a room with my children. I'm not talking to my partner. I can't be in connection with other human beings.

1 (21m 9s):
And that's because there is no capacity or willingness to be vulnerable because of that trauma. What we don't understand fully. I don't think all of us. And I think it's becoming more clear is racism is trauma. White supremacy is trauma. Poverty is trauma discrimination and harassment trauma. And so what is very difficult is that just because vulnerability is more dangerous and more difficult because of your identity doesn't mean you require less of it in order to lean into your full humanity.

1 (21m 56s):
And so we really, as leaders have a responsibility to create real belonging and real brave spaces. So that vulnerability is not a privilege of a few people.

0 (22m 19s):
It's so interesting. Cause I keep thinking about the, the name of one of your podcasts unlocking us. And it seems to me hearing you right now that vulnerability is like a key. It's like a key to unlocking all kinds of things. And, and, and as you say, it doesn't come easy to everybody, but leaders can create an environment in which people can feel safe, comfortable, supported by unlocking that door.

1 (22m 55s):
Yes. In very intentional hard-fought ways. I've never seen it in an organization where representation is not a priority.

0 (23m 10s):
I wonder Bernay is, is toughness compatible with vulnerability? Can you be both?

1 (23m 19s):
You can't be tough if you can't be vulnerable. Vulnerability is a prerequisite for toughness. I'll tell you what toughness is. Toughness is. I made a mistake. I made a bad call. I didn't collect enough data before I made the decision. It costs us a lot of money. It costs us a lot of work. I apologize. I've learned we need to lean in and fix it. And we need to embed this learning in culture. So we don't make the same mistake again. That's toughness. Toughness is I hear what you're saying and I appreciate it. I'm not going to be able to take that on right now, unless you help me.

1 (23m 60s):
We prioritize the other things on my plate. Toughness is I understand this is important to you, but we are family first and family second year, and you've got a mom going into chemotherapy and what's okay. Is to prioritize, taking care of her. What's not okay is to pretend like you don't need help right now and not allow your team to support in a way that is manageable and strategic while you're going to be out. Toughness is leaning into hard conversations. Toughness is understanding that clear is kind and unclear is unkind. It's choosing to do what you believe is right over being liked.

1 (24m 45s):
It's taking a stand and you know, your brand is going to take a lot of shit for that stand. But you also know that it's the right thing to do. So there is no toughness without vulnerability. How

0 (24m 59s):
Important in your view, even in the earliest phases of someone's leadership journey, is it to bake vulnerability into your leadership ethos. You can understand why a leader might not want to focus on vulnerability initially, but, but do you think that actually is a priority from the very beginning? Only

1 (25m 21s):
If you want to succeed, like, yeah. We would use a continuum and our work of daring leadership versus armored leadership. So daring leadership is courageous leadership. The, the capacity to be able to stay in vulnerability instead of tapping out, to know your values and live into them, to build trust, and to be able to get back up after you get your ass kicked, which you will many times as an entrepreneur, I think a entrepreneur and a startup and someone who's in a startup asking themselves, should I be vulnerable too late?

1 (26m 4s):
You just started a business too late. You're already vulnerable. So learn how to do it well. So let's look at some of the big markers. Number one, being a knower and being right is armored leadership, being a learner and being committed to getting it right. That's vulnerable, that's daring leadership. So if you want to be a learner, if you are committed to curiosity, if you're committed to getting it right versus being right, you gotta be vulnerable tapping out of hard conversations. Like it's so hard, but that's vulnerable, you know? And what is, what is the alternative you tap out of them?

1 (26m 46s):
You don't talk to people. You talk about them. Like that's not leadership. One of the biggest mistakes that I, you know, don't start a business. If you are not willing to skill up around having tough conversations,

0 (27m 3s):
I'm going to make a, a statement here and I'm open to being disproved. I think it's been much harder for leaders to lead at the highest levels or to lead as their best selves in the era of video leadership, zoom leadership over the past year and a half. I think it's been really, really hard. And I'm sure that you have been asked to help. How have you, how have the leaders you've talked to navigated their leadership journeys through this, this medium trying to lead a large or medium or small teams through a camera?

1 (27m 44s):
Oh, it's been hard. It's been really hard. It's been hard. It's been hard for me. And I feel like I have a pretty, pretty stocked toolbox. I can't even tell you that over the past year, I don't think I've had a single meeting with a group of leaders where people weren't crying by the end of it, myself included. Sometimes it's been very difficult and I'll tell you the people who've done well at some point through the past 14 or 15 months, the leaders and I'm talking big fortune 10 companies are the leaders who said, Jesus, I just gotta pay attention to my people.

1 (28m 28s):
I have to help my people. And I need to make sure that when we come out of this, my folks are still standing. And the people who did that, the, the, the people who either didn't have to shift, cause they went into this with that already as a mindset, I think did pretty well, but they would also probably tell you, it was the hardest year. Yeah. The people that were willing to make that shift, I think they'll never be the same again. And that's a beautiful, wonderful, important thing. And I think the people that could not make that transition, I don't think they're doing well right now.

1 (29m 8s):
And I don't think they're going to, I don't think they are actually retaining the people that most of us would really fight to retain. You

0 (29m 18s):
Know, I I'm curious for now because I mean, you are an academic, you're a scholar, I'm a researcher and, and, but you also are an entrepreneur. What do you struggle with as a leader? I mean, you're the leadership person we come to you, you are, I think one time you described yourself as the, as the shame action figure, right. We come to you, these things, right. What do you struggle with?

1 (29m 46s):
I think my greatest struggle, to be honest with you is I'm a maker more than I'm a manager and kind of my source code is research and creativity. And so trying to lead and manage teams when I have to have really uninterrupted time to create and research and write feels like the unsolvable for me most of the time. And so I think that's hard and I just have this incredible team. And I mean, they will say things to me like the way that you showed up in that meeting this morning felt really off.

1 (30m 37s):
I think you were outside of your values. Wow. That I'll cry by myself. Get my shit together. Think it through. Think about what I learned. Think about why was showing up that way. Apologize and do it different.

0 (30m 53s):
You know, I'm curious about something we're now was thank you for having me on your podcast last year. It was so fun. I had such a good time being interviewed by you. You're so good at it. And I mean, after interviewing people for years and years and years with your research, I'm not surprised. And you, you actually asked me to answer the question. What is one piece of it? Leadership of leadership advice that I've been given. That's so remarkable that, that I need to share it or so bad that it need to warn people about, but I didn't get to ask you that same question. So what is one piece of leadership advice that you've been given?

0 (31m 35s):
I'm sure you've been given a lot and you've given out a lot to other people, but what's one, maybe two that is either indispensable or maybe so bad that people should not should avoid it.

1 (31m 48s):
Curiosity is a big construct in my research and it's a core value for me, but I just did this podcast with Michael Bungay Stanier. And it was how to get out of advice-giving and kind of how to tame our advice-giving monster. And I think sometimes I think because people come to me a lot for advice, sometimes I think it can become how I feel like I add value. Yeah. He really deconstructed some of that. Like mostly our advice kind of sucks when you go into advice-giving mode, you're really sending a message that you don't have the answer. And I do.

1 (32m 29s):
And so one thing that he said that I have found indispensable is stay curious just a little longer. And so I live by be curious, but stay curious just a little bit longer than what I'm comfortable. Staying curious has been a game changer for me. Stay quiet. Just that extra pause. Ask one more question. And that's been huge for me, cause I will tell you, I don't believe great transformative leaders have answers, but the most stunning moments of leadership that I've ever witnessed have been observing the questions that great leaders ask people.

1 (33m 21s):
That's where great leadership really shine. So I'm going to go with a remarkable piece of advice, which is stay curious just a little bit longer even than you think you need to be.

3 (33m 34s):
That's Bernay

0 (33m 35s):
Brown professor, author and host of the unlocking us podcast. You've been listening to my live conversation about leadership from the, how I built this 20, 21 virtual summit, more conversations like this one from the, how I built this summit will be in your feed soon. You will not want to miss those. So please keep an eye on your podcast. Feed. This episode was produced by Sarah safari with music composed by rum, Tina or bluey was edited by Casey Herman. Our production staff for the summit includes Neeva grant, Julia Carney, Liz Metzker, Janet oo, John Lee Anneliese Ober Giana Kappa Dona, John Isabella, Allie Prescott, Joanna Polawski and Jessica Goldstein. Our intern is Harrison BJ Choi and Jeff Rogers is our executive producer I'm guy Roz.

0 (34m 21s):
And you've been listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. HP HP has always known that good ideas come from bringing different people together, diverse viewpoints, help uncover blind spots and see possibilities. Find out how you can join HPS group of diverse thinkers at hp.com/jobs.