0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. HP HP has always known that good ideas come from bringing different people together. Diverse viewpoints, help uncover blind spots and challenge assumptions. Find out how you can join HPS group of diverse thinkers at hp.com/jobs.

1 (19s):
Hello everyone. And welcome to a very, the special edition of how I built this from NPR I'm guy Roz. So back in may, we held our first ever live virtual, how I built this summit. And most of the time we do it in person, but for obvious reasons, we had to go virtual this year, but still more than 3000 people from around the world attended. So throughout this summer, we're going to release a bunch of our conversations from the summit right here on the podcast. And today we've got my interview with entrepreneur author and social media guru, Gary Vaynerchuk. And before we dive in, I should point out that in your podcast queue right now is my other interview with Gary.

1 (1m 0s):
It's a full studio interview and it's his whole life story. And it's so interesting and amazing. And if you haven't listened to it already, you definitely should. And it'll make this conversation. You're about to hear even better. And if you've already listened and you're thinking, wait, aren't they just going to go over what they talked about in the other interview? I promise you the answer is no, there is so much more great stuff I talked about with Gary at our virtual summit, all focused on his innovative approaches to marketing and branding. So I'm probably not the first person to describe Gary as a content making machine years ago, he saw the early potential of YouTube and he launched a very funny and irreverent show about wine, which gained him a huge following and sparked dozens of other ventures.

1 (1m 50s):
And today he's got millions of followers on pretty much every possible platform. Gary built an industry around the idea that you can pretty much sell almost anything online, as long as you're passionate about it. And you put in the work Gary to say, the least makes a ton of content and not just content, but compelling content about how to well make compelling content. So here's my conversation with Gary Vaynerchuk from the 2021, how I built this virtual summit enjoy Gary. Normally I wouldn't take the time to ask you about the lemonade stand. You ran as a kid.

1 (2m 30s):
This was, I believe in New Jersey, but apparently yours. Wasn't just a stand. It was an entire franchise. How did you franchise your lemonade stand as a kid

2 (2m 42s):
By being so nice to my friends every other day of the week that they felt compelled that when I asked to stand behind the table, that they would say yes. So I learned very early on that it wasn't bribery or money. It was that my friends liked me for all the other variable things. So when I would go in for the ask, they felt compelled or guilted into doing it. And so I have multiple kids in the neighborhood that were pretty signed up for, Hey, this is your location. This is not a joke. I would actually ride a big wheels. I didn't even have an actual bike yet. The old, like big wheels. And I would go around to my stands.

2 (3m 22s):
Like I think I was totally surprised for me to be that young 6, 7, 8, and for it to come so natural to me, you know, I think about sports or musicians, you see those videos of Beyonce or LeBron. And you're just like, right, of course that's me in business. You know, we didn't film those things, but you know, I, I just kind of always knew what I loved and what was interesting to me, what came natural to me and what was, and I refined those skills in my youth. And I think that gave me a head start and what I do today,

1 (3m 58s):
I want to push back for a sec. Cause I think that's true. I do think that you are a gifted and natural entrepreneur, but most of us aren't, most of us don't have those gifts and we have to build them up. Right. You had, I remembered our conversation. You talked about working in your dad's liquor store and your dad and you were like, dad, you got to sell wine. And he's like, why? And you're like, yeah. And you've got to, you've got to position it like this. And when people come in, you know, and you figured out how to get people to linger and chat and then buy wine. So you had an instinct. So this may be hard for you to deconstruct this.

2 (4m 32s):
It's like, but let me please construct it. I'm sorry to interrupt. But like, you know, one time it was 15 saying that to my dad, I had done a hundred baseball card shows and me moving around my table and understanding locations in the mall, or like, you know, it was, yes, I agree. But it was reps, right? It was shooting baskets. Like some people born with better hand eye coordination, but you should 10,000 baskets. You're going to be a little bit better than the one who's not. And so, yeah, I think for, you know, one of the things I'm fascinated by is I know right now I could be better at skiing, music, singing tennis and pretty much most things do.

2 (5m 17s):
I think I could be at a hall of fame level on a lot of us and probably not. Do I think every one of those things can be dramatically better. I, I do. And then the question becomes, you know, why do people become much better at golf because they genuinely enjoy it. It's what they want to do for recreation. And they get better at it. To me, I've always thought of that in the context of professionalism, you know, what, if you didn't do what you were supposed to do or what your parents wanted you to do or what you thought you could make the most money with the quickest. What if you kind of focused on the things that were intriguing to you, which inherently would make you put in the reps?

2 (5m 57s):
What would that look like in a 20 year window? I still am incredibly fascinated by that thesis,

1 (6m 4s):
But I didn't know. You sing. Do you sing really?

2 (6m 6s):
I can't sing for crap. Okay. I was just taken aback for a moment, but if I did go to singing lessons, I have a funny feeling. I'd be much better than I am today. In four years, I have a funny feeling. I'm not beyond say, but I, but I, but I definitely think it would be better than I am today.

1 (6m 28s):
All right. You were very early on with your, your dad's liquor business. Get, you got into Google ad words. And I mean, and in a website when nobody was doing it and, and then eventually, you know, YouTube using YouTube as a, as a marketing tool for wine library TV, which really kind of transformed you into a brand, Gary V became a brand through this and you began to write books and, and talk about how people could make money on the internet in part by making content. Yes. Is that still part of your message today?

2 (7m 5s):
Yes. I mean, I think the right, if you read crush it today, 13 years after I wrote it, you know, talking about influencer marketing, I'm talking about podcasts, I'm talking about everything that ended up happening. You know, the book when you deconstruct it is, you know, if you're, if you're not knowledgeable about wine or jujitsu or, you know, harvesting honey, you know, that's going to hurt you. If you're not deeply interested in the community around those interests, you're not gonna be able to cultivate lifetime value. It's very hard to put in that community time and that, and have content that hits, unless that layer of making content money comes from a place where you're bringing so much value to the audience, that things start to happen, right?

2 (8m 1s):
People want to do things with you. Your audience wants to buy things from you. So it's a really interesting game of selflessness that's rise selfishness. But yes, I don't think 13 years ago people realized how much democracy would be coming to content consumption that it was not reg relegated to television, print, radio, and PR ABC, and that the internet was going to be distribution. And if you found your way of communication, whether it's video, audio written word, there was going to be opportunity. On the other side of it,

1 (8m 33s):
Gary, there are people who, who are attending the summit, who are many startup startup founders who are doing things from like a flower business to people who are providing services for consulting services, to people who are creating products. Do you believe that anything can be turned into an interesting content story? Do you think that if somebody cares enough about their thing, even if it, if it might seem a little boring on the face of it, you can turn it into something interesting through content.

2 (9m 9s):
I think that niches are a much longer tail than people think, but I don't believe all of them have the size of macro intrigue that make it something that we would all who are listening say, oh, that's like a very lucrative opportunity, you know, Frisbee, right. Do I think that you can amass a hundred fifty thousand five hundred thousand four million people into a group on Facebook and start a podcast? And I do, I really do Frisbee golf. Like I really, really do. And I continue to believe this, a person who's obsessed with Frisbee golf or Frisbee, or what have you, is she, or he more excited about the notion of making $86,000 a year and living that lifestyle doing Frisbee every day, because they were able to get a $25,000 sponsorship from the biggest thing, Frisbee for cent and YouTube abs this and this and that versus a buck 30, being a director at a company that makes them miserable.

2 (10m 14s):
That to me is the centerpiece of this argument. Because if it's wine, you could build a multi million dollar company because there's enough interest in wine. Even as a niche, if it's professional basketball, you could go on to create a seven figure business easily for yourself. If it's the red power ranger, not even power Rangers, the red power ranger, you know, you're now starting to look at a five figure monetization at scale strategy, or maybe six, if you know, Comic-Con this and this and that. So, you know, I wanted to break that down since we have time together. Yeah. There's a, I do think almost everything it's stunning, what people collect or interested in to sit and say, you can then make a career out of it.

2 (11m 4s):
Believe it or not. I, I probably go way further down the long tail than most people, because I know about affiliate deals on eBay. I know that if you really grinded and work hard and reach out to certain companies, there's, there's branding deals to be had. But obviously if you're talking about music, there's going to be a lot more general intrigue. As you go down. If you go to Christian rock, it might even be more lucrative because it's narrow, but it's still big enough. So those are the things I think through when I think about that. All right.

1 (11m 34s):
So, so some of this obviously applies to creators or content creators, or, but what about somebody who has a product or a service that they're offering? Let's say, you know, somebody watching now who has a business, how central in your view is creating a content strategy around their business. If they want to and grow

2 (11m 55s):
For me, it's top three things in 2021, because I think about growth guy. Do I think that there's millions of businesses that are chugging along doing just fine without content? Of course I do. I just know that to be true. Do I look at every one of those businesses and say to myself, if she knew that if she put $55,000 into an employee in some ads that our top line revenue would go up by 200 K thus paying, like, I believe that. So the answer is for me, I have no idea why somebody would leave the growth on the table in a world now where the cost of creative and ad arbitrage on Facebook, TOK, LinkedIn is so extreme that there's a land grab of opportunity.

2 (12m 44s):
I don't know why somebody would leave that on the table. What I see is some people are philosophically just against it because they're content, which is incredible. I'm thrilled for them. And then there's another group that tried it failed because of lack of patients or because they weren't educated enough of how to judge the people that were doing it for them and have decided this doesn't work without realizing it was, they were the reason that they don't work. It's kind of like exercising for two weeks, not getting a six pack and being like, well, this doesn't work. Yeah. So that's how I would answer that question.

1 (13m 18s):
It's interesting because we have an episode of how I built this about policy genius. The insurance marketplace it's like kayak or Expedia for insurance and Jennifer Fitzgerald. She tried to raise a million dollars. She couldn't, they ended up raising under $700,000 to start this business, which today has 30 million users, but they couldn't raise it a lot of money. It was, it was Jennifer and her co-founder Francoise. Their third hire was a content person to write articles about the insurance industry on their website. And I said to her, how were you able to measure success in that first year? And she said, we weren't, we didn't know if anybody was reading these articles, but eventually they started to rise up in search engine queries.

1 (14m 1s):
And today, most people go to policy genius to learn about insurance. Some of them buy insurance, some of them don't, but that's been central to their strategy.

2 (14m 11s):
It's everything you just said is biggest things I believe in the world. And that is intent-based marketing because you're writing articles to win the arbitrage of SCM, where people are typing things in, in Google with intent. And then you show up, which I love intent-based marketing. I also, what I love about social media is that is more classic brand awareness marketing that used to be left for the biggest brands in the world. Coca-Cola Disney Delta, because the way those society worked was television print and radio were the places we were consuming information.

2 (14m 52s):
The costs of full-page ads in the New York times and running commercials on television were so extraordinary that the attention sat at the top. And that's why you got the Procter and gamble. So the Coca-Cola's and the deltas. Now we have awareness discovery happening in Instagram and in Tik TOK, which is completely democratized the ability to brand. And so you could have something like, I'll give you a great example, the ocean spray viral video, right, right. That is the single most impactful ad in the history of ocean spray, cranberry. Yes. Done by a man that wasn't in the company nor hired by an agent as an agency, right.

2 (15m 37s):
There are things going on now because the tick talks morality that are just extraordinary. And, and most of the world has not caught up to that. People are transactional and digital marketing. So they look for the CAC and the LTV, the customer acquisition costs, the lifetime value, their salespeople, the branding, people still live in television and kind of like business school, how to build a brand. And aren't contemporary in where they do create a brand building. And so when you have is this vacuum, this incredible situation, currently guy in the world where very few people actually understand that you can build brand brand on social at very low costs.

2 (16m 23s):
And I believe that that is where the opportunity sits today.

1 (16m 27s):
So Gary, if somebody's watching today and most, most of the attendees that are in our community, you know, they're not, they don't have million dollar ad budgets or marketing budgets. They can't, you know, with all due respect, they can't afford VaynerMedia. You know, which is right. You work with fortune five comes. But if you were to say to somebody, look, if somebody says, said to you, well, Gary, how do I start? How do I create content with limited resources and limited time? Where do I even begin? What do you, what do you do? I say,

2 (16m 56s):
I say a couple of things. I say, look, if you want to grow and you have limited resources, your actual resources, your ability to be educated. And you allocate the time when people say to me, well, I don't have time. You know, when I bought it and I do that for my best friends, my acquaintances, distant relatives randomly, cause I'm in the mood. Sometimes guide what people realize is they waste an extraordinary amount of time every day. If you talk to somebody who has six employees and as a business, she or he often is micromanaging that they have no reason to be micromanaging. They have our meetings that can be 15 minute meetings. And miraculously, every time I've done a cat scan and MRI and audit, we have found three hours miraculously from people that have no time.

2 (17m 43s):
Then what I say is now that we found three a day a day, and that gives me 15 for the week. I want the first two weeks to be education. Give me 30 hours of education. Watch these YouTube videos, read these tutorials that are free on the internet here. You know, here, you know, Google way, how do I make a LinkedIn post for a lawyer? How to, you know, make a podcast, how to write articles that succeed on LinkedIn. It's all there. It's all there. 30 hours. Then the next 30 hours, which is now obviously the first months formula. So the next two weeks, 30 hours belongs to you. You, the proprietor, you make content for 30 hours.

2 (18m 26s):
Let me tell you why, whether it's writing, whether it's recording an audio clip on your iPhone, or whether you're comfortable in video, which is smaller, but obviously high impact. You can't as a business owner, judge, when you can finally afford to hire someone or use an agency, the work, if you don't understand it, the greatest vacuum in the last decade, guys, that people have been hiring people to do social media work. And I have no idea how to judge Julia. They have no clue. Yeah. So they're like, how is this? It's just a black box. And so I believe that if you audit your days, everybody's listening right now. I don't have those three hours.

2 (19m 6s):
You really do. It's stunning. How much time people spend on things that they're just accustomed to doing? It's this is what I do. What couldn't you have that person do? Like, this is what I like. And so once I get through 60 hours in that month and use that formula to 30 and 30, then you make decisions. And then you know what I've heard from people. And I've been doing this a long time. Some people fall in love with it and they become the content producer that they never ever dreamed of. And so that's a very practical answer. Like you have that level of control as a small business owner. And that's what I think you should do, Gary, you and we talked about, I apologize, what would the spiral of thought please?

2 (19m 46s):
Everything I just said I did for seven years, for seven years before I hired anyone seven years, I did my own content. All of it.

1 (19m 57s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. More of my conversation with Gary Vaynerchuk about which brands he thinks are doing some excellent marketing right now and why stay with us? I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this. And PR this message comes from NPR sponsor, GoDaddy, making a different future starts with you. That's why GoDaddy does more than help. You find a name you can create, sell, and get found online. So any small business can be a driving force to create change, or build an empire.

1 (20m 38s):
So whatever it is you have in mind that will help make a different future. Find everything you need to get started@godaddy.com because the future isn't decided yet it's up to us to make it happen. Start different@godaddy.com. This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up, meet a productivity solution. That's guaranteed to save you one day, every week, click up brings all of your work into one place, tasks, docs, chat, and goals. So you can focus on work without switching apps. It's how companies like Uber, Google, and Webflow save time with 10,000 five-star reviews and used by 200,000 plus teams click up is one place for all your work and it's free forever.

1 (21m 24s):
So try click up today at kickup.com/npr.

0 (21m 28s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Dana Farber cancer Institute, who showed how the immune system can be enabled to attack cancer cells. This led to further discoveries against Hodgkin lymphoma, melanoma, and other cancers. Learn more at Dana farber.org/everywhere.

1 (21m 48s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this on guy rise. So as part of this year is how I built this summit back in may. I spoke with social media expert, Gary Vaynerchuk, and the topic was branding and marketing. Here's more of that conversation. You have a massive following today and you built that up over time, very methodically and very slowly. But if you are starting a business today and you want to do a version of the same thing, it may not be quite the same. How do you advise people to, to create content that is meaningful and not just a bunch of noise? Cause you earlier, you mentioned passion and devotion, but passionate devotion is one thing.

1 (22m 30s):
How do you actually create content? That's half decent.

2 (22m 34s):
The audience will decide. And I think if you look at it, value comes in a couple places. I think about to ease a lot guy expertise where escapism. So if somebody is listening right now, two things that have always worked to guy's question is, do you have expertise in what you're talking about? And you have to have humility here in self-awareness like, you know, some people are like, I'm an expert and really you're just an enthusiast. Do you have expertise? Or can you create escapism? Escapism comes in many shapes and forms.

2 (23m 14s):
It's really entertainment or something that's of interest. Right? For example, being funny is an incredible tool of escapism. Yeah. You've made somebody laugh. They stop thinking about their day. But I think it requires someone saying, okay, I'm passionate about video games. How am I going to build a big Twitch channel? It's going to come from that. You're epic at Fortnite. And people just watching you out of awe of your skillset expertise, or you might just be solid, but you're so damn compelling while you're playing. And you're storytelling. You're making people laugh. You've got a personality trait, charisma.

2 (23m 54s):
You know, I tell everybody I meet in real life that just oozes charisma like, Hey, have you considered this content thing? Like, like if you translate the way you do in this room right now to that medium, it's going to be something that may lead to something. So I think the answer is, you know, for me, I think the reason I've been able to build to where I've been able to build too is I ended up having both without even truly understanding. I have either when I started, I think I took for granted how much I knew about wine, because it was my cocoon. When I started the show, I definitely guy didn't ever think of myself as a pro. I was 30 years old when I did my first episode. I never thought I would be known for having notoriety.

2 (24m 36s):
I knew that I was a class clown and had a level of charisma that people were attracted to me, but I never anticipated me popping on video. The way I ended up popping the video.

1 (24m 46s):
Well, to this point about charisma, right? Some people have it naturally. Some people, many people, by the way, I believe can develop charisma. Charisma can come with things like leadership or responsibility, but some people don't, they just don't have it. Or they don't, you know, they're more introverted or shy,

2 (25m 4s):
Which I think leads to podcasting and writing. I have a lot of friends and a lot of people who've sent me incredible emails that are very emotional to me because, you know, I am so over the top, but I would argue that so much of the feedback I get are from people that are very different than me, because they hear me saying what I'm about to say, which is like, look, don't force the media. If you are incredibly awkward or non charismatic in your own judgment and the judgment of others, this is not like a self-esteem issue. Well then don't force trying to like carry a one hour show on video. You know, I'll be very Frank with you. I'm devastated that I'm not a better writer or have that skill set.

2 (25m 45s):
I would love to not have like kind of the on pressure that audio and video create. And then sometimes just being sometimes Skype. I'll give you a great example. I'm on flights sometimes where I just have massive ideas, but because of the, you know, I'm on a plane and it's not conducive to putting out a video, I wish I could bang out an incredible 16 sentence manifesto and post it on LinkedIn. It doesn't flow for me that way. My book writing is you should see what's going on with my latest book. It's hilarious. I audio the whole thing with a ghost writer and now we're going through it. And I'm literally, it's been read back to me because of audio and I'm adjusting to it.

2 (26m 28s):
And then sometimes I'm a Jew I'm making edits. And then the original time, I just said it two lines later, it's like an inefficient process. So just to not be too long winded, find your medium. If you're not incredibly charismatic, you might have the luxury of being a compelling writer and that's okay. You don't have to be on video. And audio writing is still rushing on the internet.

1 (26m 53s):
But if it sounds to me that, I mean, I think this is sort of self-evident that if you have ambitions to scale, to create something much bigger than, than where you are right now, it's hard work. You have to be it all of these places or in some or many

2 (27m 9s):
Of these places or, or I don't think of it as hard work. I genuinely think of it as fitness. Right? So Seth was part of my team right now, came in to set up this. I, I, when he walked this, et cetera, he looked great. He's just like a really good shape. He's always been in great shape, but I know that Seth puts in the work. Of course he has some natural, you know, DNA gifts. I have put in a lot of work over the last seven years physically. And I look at my old videos and now I'm like, man, I'm really, I'm really proud, but I'm not Mr. Olympia. Right? And I also, I'm now 45. I did this at 27. It might've been interesting, but like this 45 year old little God is never going to. And, and that's how I think about what we're talking about here.

2 (27m 50s):
Look, you don't have to go to the hall of fame like Coby and be in the gym every minute of your life. Yes. This is not about like, if you dream it, it will come. But this is about, look, if you put in reps in the gym, you will start gaining muscle, but don't get to the place of the gym where you start hurting yourself and getting burned out. Or you go so hard in the gym for three months, but then you eat like crap for a month because it wasn't sustainable the way the gym and health and fitness is. That's how I think about business for me, a lot of effort on work has been very easy. It is my hobby business is my golf is my skiing is my painting.

2 (28m 36s):
It's my hobby. I also know for a lot of people, it is not, and it's beautiful to have a nine to five business that, you know, you stay within your means of what that does, but Hey, if you go nine to six and you have your same talent, yes, you're going to be eking out results.

1 (28m 51s):
So here's my question. I, and this is a bit of a digression because we're talking about marketing, but, and I, I asked you a version of this in the podcast, but I'm really curious what motivates you? I mean, if it's not, I mean, you're very wealthy. You've made a lot of smart investments. You've sold businesses. You go to garage sales and the weekend looking for bargains. What, you know, I mean, I love that a beloved, but, but what, what motivates you? Is it money? Is it, is it

2 (29m 17s):
It's three, it's three things. Let's break down garage sailing. So I'm living life, putting out all this marketing stuff and I'm, I listen for all my talking. So I get a lot of DMS and emails saying cool, Gary, but I can't put a thousand dollars into Netflix stock. I can't put $5,000 into YouTube ads. I'm like, okay, that makes sense. I'm going to show people. I did. When I was 17 to 24, to make some side money, I'm going to show them how I garage sale. You want to start with $11. I got something for you. And let me show you, you go from 11 to 4,000 in a summer by going to town sales of getting educated, the other part of that group.

2 (29m 59s):
So that's the legacy guy to answer your question, three things. I want legacy. I'm a, I'm attracted to legacy. I'm genuinely curious, which is number one for me. When you said, what drives you? Curiosity? I'm wildly curious where I sit in my profession. I love sports sports. Has it epic? There's a lot of data that supports a LeBron James versus a Dominic Wilkins conversation in business. It's a little trickier because what's interesting is my relationship with money. I have a little bit of a different take with entrepreneurship. I think innovation matters. I also think how much you give back to, you know, how I'm living my life, how much you give back to entrepreneurship is to the game is interesting, but I am curious how strategic am I?

2 (30m 49s):
How much can I squeeze out of the gifts I was given? So I think curiosity, legacy, the thrill of the hunt, you know, the best part about garage selling is you pull up to a house at seven 30 in the morning, and you don't know if you're going to find a rare Nintendo game for a dollar. It's fun. You

1 (31m 7s):
Know, I I've said this before. I I've said it before publicly. I think curiosity is much more important than, than raw intelligence. I think actually people who are curious, because I think curiosity is a, is a, can be a developed, it's a choice you can choose to be curious. And it's as simple as that. And it's actually much, much more important than raw intelligence because in my experience, every founder who's been on how I built. This is a person who follows their curiosity. So I think it's a, it's a super important point. I want to, I want to ask you about a brand and you may not, you may not have one off the top of your head, but maybe you do which brand right now do you think is, is doing marketing very well right now?

2 (31m 53s):
No, believe it or not. We work with Tik TOK, Vayner, but it's not the work we're doing with them. That's going to make me say tick-tock, it's going to be the fact that I think Nick Tran is a very good operator as their CFO. I love what they're doing with their television commercials, using content that like, it's my favorite concept. It's, you're getting affirmation that human beings think this is interesting. And then you're taking it to another platform and giving it even more awareness. So I think Tik TOK is done a very solid job of it's really funny. I think Tik TOK and Facebook, believe it or not building awareness around groups, I'm blown away by how much under 30 year olds are signing up for Facebook groups at scale.

2 (32m 38s):
Right now, I think it's an marketing job by them. Health cosmetics, I think has been very native to tock, to a demo that they need to win there. That those are some things like, you know, my brain went very fast when you said that. Yeah. You know, the truth is it's always a tough question for me because, because unless I know the business results. Yeah. I think that marketing is very good at cheering for itself in a silo, without asking if it's doing what it's supposed to be doing, you know what the ad world loves to clap and celebrate itself around work, that isn't actually driving business results, which I've always found fascinating.

1 (33m 16s):
What do you think, think about sort of, you know, kind of unusual approaches to content marketing. Like I think of steak comes, you know, steak comes, steak comes, has a, a Twitter account. That's gotten a lot of attention because it's just the person writing the tweets is just really quirky and weighing in on all kinds of things that have nothing to do with stadiums, but it's, but you go to their website, it's actually kind of funny and interesting and they sell t-shirts and hats. And it's, you know, I haven't thought of Stakem since the eighties,

2 (33m 45s):
I'm a huge fan of breaking patterns. If you think of, you know, it's funny, I have been willing as a human being to take on a little Crow, a little judgment out of my subconscious bias towards breaking patterns. I wouldn't call it shock jock, but I think, you know, when I, when I communicate a lot of times I look at myself, I'm like, it took me a long time. I'm like, oh, this is me being affected by Randy, the macho man Savage and Eddie Murphy and Chris rock, like I'm affected by that. And when I think about those three, they broke patterns in their craft in delivery. And I think what you're talking about with steak comes, or when these does very well or other brands Popeye's is breaking patterns.

2 (34m 32s):
I mean, it's what we did with planters, right? We killed Mr. Peanut that stopped everybody, no guy before being or one the planters business. When we started doing the work, we realized nobody cared about Mr. Peanut. That was a 1960s phenomenon. So how do you break the pattern? You kill him. All of a sudden, miraculously America really cared about it. And so, yeah. I mean, how do you break patterns? Like that's what commercials were when they first hit television. What's unusual that isn't annoying or disruptive. That's what commercials became. So yeah, I'm a big fan of marketing that is different catches you quote unquote off guard, but values the other person's time.

2 (35m 17s):
And that's where I think we've lost our way in marketing. A lot of marketing is destructing people instead of catching them off guard,

1 (35m 25s):
The content has to be worthwhile. It goes

2 (35m 28s):
Back to that escapism. Like if, instead of the pre-roll podcast ad, if out of nowhere guy, he started singing, let's use you one of the great fan of the great shifts son before what? I mean the ad, right? Like, like if somebody, if I can't use it, I really want wine techs to explode. And I think your audience, so would you sick? Yeah. I don't want to do a live read. I don't want to do a pre-roll. I don't want to do mineral. I want to pay you that in the middle of an interview, out of nowhere, for no reason, you start going wine texts.com, you know, like, like that would completely stop your entire audience. That's how my brain thinks. I think in creative ways that will completely get everybody to quote unquote, pay attention, but not be something that is bothering them because they want to actually hear the rest of it.

2 (36m 20s):
There's a level of surprise, the white integration. It's why I fell in love with social media. It was in the feed. It wasn't like you just got, I'm watching a show and it gets the cliff hanger that crap. Now I got to watch it a Spindrift bag, big shot of the Spindrift I'm drinking one right now. It's more integrated in a different silly way. You singing a wine text ad will make people chuckle more so than when you start reading. And Hey, let's stop real quick. This, I gotta give a shout out to one of our sponsors. It's already dead. Cause it's intrusive. Instead of, in addition to

1 (36m 54s):
Gary, I am going to explore that and I hope our audience watching right now will forgive me. If I break out in song in the middle of your podcast episode, just

2 (37m 3s):
In the middle of it randomly, I'm in

1 (37m 7s):
That's Gary Vaynerchuk. We talked back in may as part of the, how I built this 20, 21 virtual summit, more conversations like this one from the, how I built the summit will be in your feed soon, including my live interviews with Bernie brown, Adam Grant and Rashad Robinson, you will not want to miss those. So please keep an eye on your podcast. Feed. This episode was edited by Casey Herman with music composed by routine Arab Louie, our production staff for the summit includes Neeva grant, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Farah safari. It was Metzker Janet, John Lee and Elise Ober, Giana Kappa Dona, John Isabella, Allie Prescott <inaudible> and just Goldstein.

1 (37m 47s):
Our intern is Harrison VJ choy. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer and guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.

0 (38m 5s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. HP HP has always known that good ideas come from bringing different people together, diverse viewpoints, help uncover blind spots and see possibilities. Find out how you can join HPS group of diverse thinkers at hp.com/jobs.