2 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business? They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business. Hey, just a quick note before we start the show. We have one week left in our annual public radio fundraiser, and we're asking you to show your support for your local public radio station. You've heard me say it all month. So, please just take a moment to give your gift by December 31st. Just go to donate dot npr.org built.

2 (40s):
And thanks. Hey everyone. So today we're releasing another live interview from our how I built this Summit. It's my conversation with Referee the founder of Edible Arrangements and you might remember from the original episode. He was on that. He started his first business in high school. It was a little flower shop near his home in West Haven Connecticut and after a few years Tariq pivoted from flowers to fruit and eventually built a 600 million dollar company and Tariq story is also about family The Immigrant parents raised him and help support him in the early days of the flower shop and the sacrifices that all families make one.

2 (1m 21s):
Somebody they love becomes a full-time entrepreneur. But before we get into that part of the story, I asked her about the idea behind Edible Arrangements the idea of cutting up melon and pineapples and strawberries and arranging them into Edible Bouquets. I have a lot of questions for you, but I wanted to start on this idea about bad ideas. How did you know that that cantaloupe cut into

1 (1m 48s):
the shape of flowers and it was gonna work well, you know, The way we always do is the customers, right? So you put it together and you start selling in the floors. But before I ever started selling it there were all these ideas of sharing it with friends and sharing it with people in the industry. We had a family friend. He was a doctor he taught, you know, kids and on starting ideas and having a shared the idea is that, you know, stay in your flower business. This is crazy who would buy food on sticks in a basket, especially for the price or selling it. But every time we sent it to a customers the customers would call back and said can I uh, Order one, you know and so it you know almost became more more popular than flowers. So you kind of knew it was it was the customer and there's as I shared with you it was my mom who was really the inspiration that soon as he saw it she used to work at the flower shop.

1 (2m 34s):
She saw us. He goes honey. This is going to be really big. Yeah, you know, so and it was you know, it's

2 (2m 39s):
on that point we were earlier I was talking to Tim Brown of all birds and and Tool are American of larabar and you know, the thing about their products is they were kind of weird at the time like Merino wool shoes. Or you know dates and nuts mashed into a bar, but that weirdness was almost the thing that made it something people want to talk about like the weirdness of fruits in the shape of flowers, alt was in some ways your competitive

1 (3m 5s):
Advantage. Well, we called it unique. We didn't call her weird and I say, okay we made sure but but it is that it's different. Right? So, you know, the biggest complaints on flowers were especially when you keep the price range the same that they died, you know, and people like sharing, you know, the the experiences were as he would get it and we had a mom in the beginning. She she called a sir. She was what I loved about your

2 (3m 26s):
product is that I love seeing people

1 (3m 28s):
enjoy it by kids dig in and everybody digs in and I don't see that with other products that I buy somebody always has some kind of a reason. Oh, I don't eat chocolate. I don't eat this but everybody digs into fruit and I wish I knew a long time ago to make my kids eat more fruit. I had to put it on sticks so great job. So I think with that it is just listening to the customer and and the investors are people I was asking for money and everything sauce. Weird the customers saw that as unique and they wanted to send it because you know, they wanted someone to have a great

2 (3m 56s):
experience Tark. If for those of you who haven't heard his episodes well worth listening to it's really a remarkable story. I think you were 11 years old. You were the oldest of six kids. Yes family emigrated from Pakistan your dad worked as a machinist. He worked at Burger King to keep food on the table eventually got a loan to open a little flower shop or borrowed money from one of his bosses. I've actually Had a lot of conversations with attendees here immigrant families or first-generation Americans, you know, similar stories didn't have don't have access to Capital don't have access to networks don't have generational wealth. I mean your family literally ran that flower shop, right?

2 (4m 40s):
Like everyone had to work there

1 (4m 43s):
my father made 825 an hour at that time. And and so the the real inspiration of why we accomplished what we have accomplished would be my Others boss my father goes to him and says my son has found a flower shop for $6,000 for sale and we need a loan and Bill and Denise Holberg didn't even think about it and gave me $6,000 and said hey good luck kid. Yeah, here you go and never asked for the money and then my mom when I talked to her say I have to go to school. She's like, well, I watch the shop how hard could it be and she didn't drive a drop her off at about 7:00 a.m. This happened for about two years. I'd go to high school get out at about one o'clock. Get back to the store and all she did was Was just kind of kept an eye on it and as customers came in would seldom the flowers and then for those two years.

1 (5m 28s):
I don't remember my mom once saying that I don't feel good today and we did $70 a day for the first I think we remember three or four weeks where you know, the sales were 70 $80 a day. We're open 7 days a week. I used to deliver papers. I thought was the most phenomenal thing I ever did like $70 a day. Oh my God. I just got to get to a hundred but for us our rent at that time was $300. So when you make Hours a day seven hundred a week. You're like wow, you know because you're not thinking of paying your mom definitely doesn't get paid,

2 (5m 58s):
you know,

1 (5m 59s):
so so and she never asked for it and it was phenomenal, you know, so I think it you know, it's an interesting phenomenon that you see now, I have a lot of people they'll pitch to me. We had to take a little money and make a lot and now people want lot of money so they can lose a lot. You know, it's sort of like yeah, our burn rate is three million dollars. Like whoa, okay, you know, I you know, I couldn't borrow a hundred and twenty thousand because I went and wrote A business plan wanted to borrow a hundred and twenty thousand dollars. I put it together waited about six weeks and I got a rejection letter saying that we just don't believe in the concept. We don't think I'll work and it works just for edible just a hundred and twenty thousand for edible arrange. Yeah. It's just wondered hers after you guys had a couple has one testicle flower short.

1 (6m 41s):
Oh, yeah. The first one was doing about hundred and ninety thousand the first year we needed to scale it. Wide open one second one and I still banquet that bank and being 40 years later, but they rejected it, you know, and my only thing that I was upset was that they took seven weeks to reject it. I wish they had just rejected. All right there but we put the second store together the same way. We took kind of couple of Christmas sales and Valentine's Day sales and put a store together.

2 (7m 6s):
But when you were trying to build Edible Arrangements $120,000 that was not money that you could easily get

1 (7m 13s):
know. So, how did you I mean, did you basically have to just start? Art with what you had you built within what you had. So a lot of the equipment that you're thinking of adding you're not going to get we used to cut every piece of fruit. We wanted to get Cutters we couldn't so every piece of fruit would be cut by hand using Cookie Cutters at everything great. Great story. We didn't know we needed gloves. So as soon as we started the business we went to a health department and we wanted to get a license and they said well, no one does this I don't think you need a license go for it. So we went and this was the health department. So we went and we started and we wanted like what should we do? And Weren't wearing gloves and we didn't know that when you cut pineapple all day that pineapple starts to your so the next day no one could bend their fingers or anything.

1 (7m 54s):
So everybody walks. This is I can't bend my hands. So I'm like, I think we should wear gloves. And so we had to do that a supermarket across the street so somebody walked over and got dishwashing gloves because that's all they could find because those other gloves weren't out. So as you walked into back of our stores, everybody had yellow gloves on and they would walk around. So when sometimes a customer you would walk into the front door. So the person will go hi. May I help you? And it's scary, you know, so but it works so you learn a lot. You know, I think that money what it would have done was helped us to kind of hire the right people get some equipment and everything, but she but it's the best thing that ever happened to me that that bank refused, huh? Because we just figured out how to do it really inexpensively and focus get the stores up and running then go and you know still stay within your means and everything.

1 (8m 42s):
So I and I still believe in that that you should be very careful, especially if you're going to bring on Is who are going to take Equity away. They're going to take ownership away. So with that I didn't want to do that. It's amazing how resourceful you can be when you try and especially when you have no

2 (8m 57s):
choice Turk. I'm curious about this idea of building something that you know, or is related to who you are or where you come from David Neil Diamond if you heard his episode when he started his first travel company, he was living in Utah and many people in Utah had family in Los Angeles and Las. Guess there's a huge Mormon community in Phoenix and they would drive and and so he thought well, why aren't we making a cheap flight from Salt Lake City to La Salt Lake City to Las Vegas and he know he basically called like the Mormon triangle, you know, Phoenix Ela Las Vegas because he knew that there was a population of people you similarly talked about how you know, when in the United States or other countries people go to other people's homes.

2 (9m 42s):
They give people a bottle of wine, but for observant Muslims who don't drink Line people they bring fruit or sweets or treats that is actually part of your thinking right with Edible Arrangements. Like maybe this is something you could bring to somebody.

1 (9m 56s):
So we grew up like in Pakistan, you know, you came here was 13 eating mostly you gave sweets or you gave fruit. It's still the but staying true to something. So within my grandfather came to visit an 86 and he'd love the flower shop and flowers being sold in Pakistan would be like on the street corner. So he came here. He thought we had like these little stalls. Is that people celled you're walking around chasing taxis, you know flowers flowers, so he came and he saw the flower shop and I remember I even remember the spot that we were going over and I admired my grandfather who was a brilliant man. So and very religious man. So as I'm going and he looks and says, I really love what you do and I said why he goes because you make people smile.

2 (10m 37s):
Wow, you know, and and it makes people

1 (10m 39s):
happy and I see a lot of other friends of mine whose kids are here. So you went around the country visiting other people whose kids

2 (10m 46s):
Here

1 (10m 47s):
and he said, you know, some of them their grandfathers won't be happy with them because they sell alcohol. They sell things they don't even eat or they can't eat they shouldn't do that. They should be authentic and and he said I love what you do it promise me that you'll always keep your business Halal and I'll pray for you and God will give you a bigger success than you can ever imagine to go and and I've never forgotten that and anytime somebody introduces something that I think I would. Remise my promise with him. I always know stuff back saying no admit. This is worked really. Well. I've stayed True to this so that family value that things you grow up with you can ignore it, but it's going to come back to haunt you so it's better stay with it.

1 (11m 30s):
You know,

2 (11m 30s):
one of the things I really appreciate about our conversation on the podcast was you really open about the sacrifices the personal sacrifices that you made and that that were the result of throwing yourself into this business your first marriage fell apart for a while you were open Your relationship with your kids was was tricky because you were working all the time and you had to spend a long time rebuilding your relationship with your kids. I know your daughter so me and now works for you. She's a vice president and edible. She worked for her you work for her,

1 (12m 3s):
but just kind of holding on the company until she takes a no

2 (12m 5s):
but that took time you had to spend time rebuilding that after you had achieved success in hindsight. Could you have been as committed and as passionate and Driven and also preserve those things as well.

1 (12m 21s):
I think you know hindsight I guess right newest hindsight, but I don't know how you know because of the environment you're in we did not have the lead luxury at the pedigree or the luxury of having uncles or cousins that you can turn to for advice or get money. So you have to do it the hard way. I was on the road a lot as we build stores. Thank God for technology at that time. We leverage technology a lot. We you know the stats that people gave you was for every 10. Always you have to have an employee that that's managing those ten stores. We could only afford one for a hundred. So you were on the road. So I would get a phone call from a franchisee having this issue and I would say oh, I'll be there tomorrow and it's just that's just how I was and at times I wish I had said no, you know what I'll see you next week because the reality of it is we still put fruit in baskets.

1 (13m 8s):
So the family comes first here a little bit and you know, the most important people that you do things for usually pay the highest. As price they're they're very forgiving you know than and you know, they went through a lot and it's probably something I think about the most but at the same time these are the same people that make you successful because when you slow down they like what would you do and go because they get used to you being a certain way and especially when they see that you enjoy and you're successful they do pay a price. But at the same time you couldn't do it without I

2 (13m 40s):
mean I have had a couple conversations with on some entrepreneurs in this audience who have said look, you know, I'm a parent I've got Kids I want to spend time with my kids. That's a priority for me. And I wonder I mean is it possible? I mean you invest in companies you Mentor people you advise other Founders who are starting out both younger and older. Is it possible to really build something meaningful and purposeful that requires a lot of time and energy but still maintain your focus on your personal life your family your partner.

1 (14m 11s):
I think it's possible if you could disconnect I think you know, I think if you know, You have to have tunnel vision and that's probably why the family and of people around us suffer a little bit because you see the destination you see where you want to go and you're just at it, you know, my kids were reminding me. I have a ten year old boy and a 9 year old boy and they were both reminding me that hey we went to this ice cream shop and you were on the phone and we don't want to go to the ice cream shop because you're on the phone for an hour and we had to sit around waiting for ice cream. You know, I had to kind of learn to balance this where I just don't know how to disconnect I'll be sending messages that Am I woke up and I got this idea about how to dip Apple a different way and somebody will reply back at 4:00 a.m.

1 (14m 53s):
Like oh you didn't need to do that. This is why you sent it at 2 a.m. You know, and so I think with that you have to realize that how you're wired and I think the family has to realize and you have to be realistic with the family to say this is going to be a very hard time. You know, I'm going to be very very busy, but you know, just I only I always tell people don't waste your life or time. I'm on dumb ideas. Just you know, you have no business of being in a bad business. Don't do that because they're you won't forgive yourself and your family won't forgive you. So, you know, that's the only you know, the only balance that you have to be careful. I see some people doing some stuff they're very passionate about it.

1 (15m 34s):
And that's where you need a mentor someone to kind of help you

2 (15m 36s):
awesome. It's hard for read founder of Edible Arrangements. Thank you very much. That's tarek for read the founder of Edible Arrangements. Tariq. Join me live on stage at the 2019 how I built this Summit which happened this past October yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco. We're going to be releasing more episodes from the summit next month with guests like serial entrepreneur Marcia Kilgore Stewart Butterfield of slack. Thanks to Canada slim produce this episode and REM teen Arab Louis who wrote the music I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this.

2 (16m 21s):
This is NPR.