4 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business? They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business. One more thing before we start the show a lot of you ask how can I support how I built this and really the best way to support what we do is by supporting your local public radio station, which broadcast the show on there are waves here at NPR. We're launching our annual fundraising Campaign, which runs all the way to December 31st.

4 (41s):
So if you want to support your local public radio station, please consider donating by going to donate dot npr.org / built and thanks. Today we're releasing the very first interview from the 2019 how I built this Summit which happened in October in San Francisco. And I just want to say it was super super inspiring to have so many how I built this Founders gathered together in the same place at the same time for two days people like Mike Krieger and Kevin Systrom of Instagram Jen Rubio of away Stewart Butterfield of slack and many many others and they all sat down with Me in front of a live audience and just talked really honestly and openly about the excitement and Terror and challenges of starting a business sharing.

4 (1m 31s):
Lots of new ideas and stories along the way in today's episode is with Sara Blakely founder of Spanx. If you haven't heard the original episode, you may want to go back and give it a listen. It was our very first and still one of our favorites because really it is such a crazy success story with absolutely. No, Experience in fashion or design Sarah set up to create this new kind of undergarment one that sort of Smooths out the lumps and bumps under your clothes today. Of course thanks is an international brand and Sarah is a billionaire and what you'll discover here is that she's also super open about the strategies used to stay confident and optimistic when she was just getting started.

4 (2m 15s):
I want to go back to 1998 when you first were experimenting when you cut the feet and the legs of pantyhose. Yes and began to design what would become eventually Spanx and on the pockets. You said something to me that I've never forgotten and I'm going to quote here. You said ideas are at their most vulnerable when they're brand new. Yes, in other words some people say, oh it's not gonna work. It sucks is stupid. Forget it if it's so great. Why didn't other people do it? You decided not to pretty much not to tell anybody to keep it a secret. It was for that reason because you knew that you would be discouraged. Yes. Now I shared my idea with people who could help me move it forward like a patent attorney the people in the manufacturing plants, but I decided I wasn't going to tell anybody just to say hey, what do you think of this for a while ideas are the most vulnerable in their infancy?

4 (3m 6s):
And we all have Amazing Ideas. I'm a believer that everybody in their lifetime has at least 1 million dollar idea, maybe even a billion dollar idea but is our inclination as humans to immediately turn to our right or left and say to our friend or co-worker husband and wife and say hey, I have this idea. What do you think and out of love and concern they'll say well, you know, if it's such a great idea, why isn't anybody done it or things like that? And then you end up spending all of your time defending it and explaining it rather than pursuing it and so I pursued the idea of Spanx for one year before I told anybody I sat. Family down I said guys you ready.

4 (3m 47s):
They all they knew was Sarah's working on some crazy idea. They didn't know what it was and I sat him down and I said, okay, you ready? It's footless pantyhose, right? You can imagine the response they were like what and and then I got all the out of total love, you know, if it's such a good idea Sarah, why doesn't it already exists and you know, honey, even if this is a good idea you're going to spend your $5,000 on in savings and within six months the big guys could just knock you right out of the water and I think I really believe guy that had I heard that in the minute that I had the idea and caught the feet out of my pantyhose. I really think I would not have started Spanx you think if you would have told people or family and friends or the people who sort of judgment, you know could have affected you he would have given up.

4 (4m 38s):
Yeah or I just would have been easily let that one fly right out the window and just been like yeah. Okay. Maybe you're right, but I also I Set intention for an idea two years before this and that also helped me so I sold fax machines door-to-door for seven years and I got I was always kicked out of buildings people would rip up my business card in my face all the time. And one day I had had such a particularly bad day. I pulled off the side of the road and that's when I thought I'm in the wrong movie like call the director called the producer called the writer. This is not my life and I wrote down what I was good at in my apartment. I'm like, what are you You good at Sarah in my good column was sales and I started asking myself.

4 (5m 19s):
What is it about sales that I like and I realized I really liked selling somebody something that they needed or would improve their life and I wrote down I'm going to invent something that I can sell to millions of people that will make them feel good and then I looked up and I said I need the idea and so two years later when I cut the feet out of my pantyhose to go to a party. I had never worked in fashion or retail, but I cut the feet out and I solve this undergarment. You kind of because they rolled up my legs all night. But uh, but I you know, I looked smooth I had no lines and I thought this should exist for women, but because I had set that intention and been so clear with the universe two years prior and said, please give me the idea.

4 (6m 2s):
You know, I believe ideas are gifts from the universe and I think they're very precious and I think the minute we get them. We should write them down instantly. I've been carrying the same style notebook with me for 20 years and now I'm mostly We use my phone but I keep a log of every thought and idea that I think could potentially be something you know, I think about your story a lot because in those early days where you were going door to door selling fax machines getting doors slammed in your face at wonder if that built resiliency a did you have to be exposed to that kind of rejection in order to be able to start this company 100% I believe that cold calling is one of life's greatest trainings.

4 (6m 43s):
Well, I had to learn how to be On my feet I had to learn how to win somebody over quickly. I had to learn to get to the heart of the matter in sales scenario very quickly, which is when I learned what's in it for them and get to the point very quickly and don't sell the product sell the problem you're solving. I learned all this through massive Mega trial and error and door after door slamming in my face and that helped me so much with Spanx because for the first two years I was working on Spanx at night and on the weekends while I was still selling fax machines by By day and that I got told no for till the time. Yeah, I mean I was basically know which I just want to point out if you invent something or if you're an innovator, it means you're doing something that's different than how everybody else is doing it.

4 (7m 30s):
You're going to hear the word. No, that's cool. Mmm. If I mean if you say you had told people about this idea people who loved you and cared about you maybe some of them would have said hey, you know Sarah why don't you go work for a fashion company for a couple years and get it. Variants in the industry and learn about it and learn the ins and outs and then you know, you'll know what to do you have connections and so on but I wonder if you in some ways you had sort of an intuitive Advantage given that you act when you told me on the show. You didn't know anything about the industry, right? I mean that's really logical advice to get right especially as a parent to a child like go get experience before you go do this.

4 (8m 11s):
So there's a very high likelihood I you know would have heard that right away. And you know, one of the things my life was so bad when I was selling fax machines door to door and I had this conversation one time with my dad and he said honey, you know you live in Atlanta now go get a job at CNN or go work at Coke and this voice inside of me said but then I might be content and and I thought I need to be miserable right now. Like I need to stay miserable because if I stay in rock bottom and I'm this on happy, I'm going to ensure that I am willing to take some sort of a leap that terrifies me, but I mean even early on you didn't ask for permission.

4 (8m 57s):
I mean you didn't ask for permission when you went to Neiman Marcus, I mean your products were on display and sort of the back of the Hosiery section and you surreptitiously moved in next to the cash register. So people would notice Em, you didn't ask for permission and you it was almost like you were Fearless you wouldn't you weren't worried about the consequences of doing those kinds of things. Yeah, I'm definitely not Fearless. I'm courageous and there's a big difference. I'm afraid of so many things like those days that I moved the stand when no one gave me permission to I was shaking but I believe the difference is that courage is doing things despite fear and you know, we build our courage muscle by continuing to just face it and do it, but I was Terrified during all of those steps.

4 (9m 41s):
I will say that I think being an entrepreneur and charting your own course, especially if you're going to be doing things different than how everybody else does it which is where real change and Innovation for society in the world happens. You have to be someone who is willing to ask for forgiveness. Not permission and I still I still live my life that way, you know, I feel like there were so many fundamental things that happened in the early days where I would just Just ask for forgiveness if Spanx had not gotten any traction in the first few years. Do you think you would have persisted and kept going?

4 (10m 24s):
Yes, I mean when you said that I just was looking at you so confused because I'm like, of course it would get traction because I was making the traction. I went to every department store in the country that bought Spanx to sell it and sold it for them. I stood in the store from Be in the morning until 7:00 at night every day selling my own product to ensure was a success. And then the other thing I did guy was I was buying my own product. So I was spending check right to all of my friends around the country to go by Spanx. So it was like I was a hundred percent sure it was going to take off right? I mean literally I would call friends and I'd say hey, it's Sarah.

4 (11m 6s):
Can you go into the Neiman Marcus in Dallas and look like you love? Product called Spanx and buy it and I'll mail you a check. I mean you have to and then I would go stand in the department stores and I would be selling the product and I realized that a lot of people just would ignore me. So I would ask friends to come over to Neiman's on their lunch break just to stand by my table and look interested because energy begets energy. So then all of a sudden my friends, I'd be like Q go and they'd be like, wow this looks so interesting about all these Shoppers would come over and you know, I'd have to like push. My friends inside me like okay good. So I mean when you think about the Arc of the story, right you launch the product and within two years Oprah is talking about I mean, it sounds like up just a flash like so quickly.

4 (11m 56s):
Did it feel like it was fast at the time or did it feel like a sort of a slow burn the development of the product felt very slow. It took two years and I was working at night and on the weekends, but then once I had the product made Did feel like it was very fast. I mean, I quit my job on October 16th and Oprah called me in the beginning of November. Well and chose Spanx is her favorite product of the year, which of course it blew up right beat you you an apartment Atlanta at the time and then you were stacked boxes stacked and I did it was really a wild time. Yeah. I was the Fulfillment house. So I semi trucks coming to my apartment twice a week with boxes of Spanx and I didn't have a website and you know, of course.

4 (12m 40s):
Oprah shows like you have a website right? Because that's a requirement to be a favorite thing. I was like, yes. Yes, I do. I had like six days to build a website. I didn't know what I was doing. I didn't know anything. I actually took a color copy of the packaging I created on my friends computer and scanned it. And that was the homepage of my website for a year and a half Sarah as you know, the theme of this conference is kindness and collaboration. We deliberately wanted that to be the theme because It seems so unbusinesslike and ish and we want we think that this show people like you the founders we've had on the show really read are redefining what it means to run a business and ethical business and a kind company in a collaborative company.

4 (13m 24s):
Can you share just one quick story of kindness or an act of kindness that you experience when you you know, when you were trying to wrap this thing up? I mean there's where do I begin? There's so many acts of kindness. That's the reason that I'm sitting here, but when I first Darted Spanx. It was about three months after I started it. I was at a cocktail party and three guys came up to me and they said Sarah so we heard you invented something and I said, yes I did. I'm so excited and one of the guys put his hand on my shoulder and he said, yep great. He goes, you know business is war and I just looked at him and the other guy goes. Yep. I hope you're ready to go to war Sarah and I went back that night and sat on the floor of my apartment and I think I was in Hello Kitty.

4 (14m 10s):
I'm a bottoms and I just was staring at the floor and I thought I don't want to go to war like there has to be a better way. There has to be a different way. I've no interest in going to war and I made a decision that night that I was going to go about this business in a very different way and use very different principles of other than going to war and I just want to say I'm very happy that I believe there's a real shift happening now where the conversations around using kindness and Ility and empathy and intuition is finding its home inside of business because I truly think it's about the balance, you know, sir. I think a lot of people are surprised when they hear stories of Founders who are not naturally charismatic.

4 (14m 55s):
I can think of like Yvonne Stern our door Eileen Fisher Tony hsieh. They're more introverted. They have occurred as an inner Charisma they have but they're more introverted and and quiet and you come across as very charismatic. First of all, is that something that you just are Is that something you learned how to be as you grew into your into your role? I feel like this is who I am. So I feel like I've been this way since I was a little girl do you think it's an important quality to have as a Founder? I mean clearly not because there's so many Founders that aren't more extroverted. I think it's really fundamentally comes down to the belief in yourself and the profile of the person listen, you got to hire your weaknesses as soon as you can afford to hmm.

4 (15m 42s):
I know what my weaknesses are and if you're the kind of founder that sales and being out front in front of people and cold calling and doing all of that isn't your thing then that's a great place for you to invest your money early on as soon as you can afford to I needed to invest in an operator very clearly. I was not good at that. I did not enjoy that the day-to-day management of the company the inventory the logistics. I mean, literally I remember when I first started in Had to be every Department. I was the head of sales the head marketer the head Packer and shipper. I was the before and after but model I was literally every Department. Okay, and one time I don't know that I've ever told the story one time in the beginning when it was all happening.

4 (16m 26s):
I was having to ship Neiman Marcus orders. I got my big break and the buyer said I'll put him in seven stores. And so I was in the Isle of Office Depot looking for a bill of lading and Chest? Okay and all of a sudden I sat on the floor of the island started sobbing. I just started crying and this man was looking for like, I don't know envelopes. He's like are you okay honey? I'm like what a bill of lading. I don't even know what I'm doing and it was highly overwhelming to me that side of the business. How did you how did you deal with don't really know. What a bill of lading is. All right.

4 (17m 6s):
How did you manage your own personal anxiety? In those early days and even as you began to grow, yeah, I definitely have a lot of negative self-talk. It's a part of my life. I think it's a part of everybody's life. I will doubt myself often I still do and I've also trained myself to identify when it's happening because sometimes we don't even know we're saying the stuff we're saying to our self and so the identification in the awareness is a big part of it and then I will reframe it. I will just stop it and I have certain things that I'll say to the voice when it starts happening and I'll redirect it. It's remarkable because I think a lot of people in this audience and Beyond who know you would think of you is this, you know, the superhero right like that.

4 (17m 54s):
You would never have self-doubt or anxiety, but I think it's important to hear that because a lot of the founders on our show have talked about that have talked about things like imposter syndrome or about experiencing bouts of Out even now even after they've been wildly successful. I think that's a big part of success. I think it's the people who can manage their own negative self-talk and their own self-doubt that really is a huge component to success. There's a quote that says self-doubt will kill more successes than failures ever will so I just happened to be lucky.

4 (18m 35s):
I was going through a really hard time in my life at the age of 16. I watched my friend run. Over by a car and killed and then my dad left home my parents got separated and when my dad moved out he handed me these cassette tape from Wayne Dyer and said sweetie. I wish I was your age when I listen to this instead of the age of 40 and then he left and so I started listening to these and it talked about not caring what other people think about you not fearing failure and I started to cry in my bedroom and I just remember thinking I have just spent 16 years in school being taught what? Thank but nobody has ever taught me how to think and it was like it was like the lights went off and I went.

4 (19m 20s):
Oh wait, I can control how I think and then I became a student outside of school of that anything I could get my hands on of how can I train my thinking to process things in a way that propels me forward rather than holds me back and I got to say in high school. Nobody wanted to be stuck in my car. After a party, they're like don't go in her car. She going to make you listen to that motivational stuff. I had it on at all times literally and then and then I ended up on the cover of Forbes like 10 or 15 years later and all my friends from Claire what are high texted me and they were like damn Shoulda listened to that.

4 (20m 2s):
That's Sara Blakely founder of Spanx. Sarah join me live on stage at the 2019 how I built this Summit which happened in October. Burr yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco. We're going to be running more conversations from the summit every Thursday through the new year. So keep checking for updates next week. We've got Troy Carter and investor and the former manager behind Lady Gaga. Thanks to JC Howard who produced this episode and routine are blue who composed the music. I'm guy Roz even listening to how I built this.

4 (20m 44s):
This is NPR.