2 (0s):
Hey everyone. So I've got kind of a random question for you. What do you get when you take two psychologists one social worker and a few pounds of day-old pita bread. The answer of course is Stacy's Pita Chips one of the businesses we featured in our how I built this Summit last fall. Now if you remember Stacy story from the podcast she was a social worker who teamed up with her brother David and her then husband Mark both of whom were psychologists in all Other words they knew nothing about the food industry when they built a multimillion-dollar snack company and the whole thing began almost by accident When Stacy and Mark ran a sandwich cart on the streets of Boston, they would take leftover Pita cut it up and bake it into these crunchy little triangles, which at first they gave away for free until it became clear that people were willing to pay for them.

2 (54s):
Anyway, when Stacy and I sat down live on stage in San Francisco. I asked her what was going through her head? The time do you remember thinking even once you kind of moved into making pita chips that this would grow into a massive brand

1 (1m 11s):
no no idea and no intention. Absolutely. None never started the company with an exit strategy. Didn't know what an exit strategy was when we started didn't know what a business plan was.

2 (1m 23s):
What do you think it was it fueled the growth? I mean, was it something that you were doing or do you think in some ways the growth found you because it was sort of a wave right that you started to ride bread and circus in Boston, which now is Whole Foods and there was more interest in sort of simpler and wholesome Natural Foods.

1 (1m 42s):
Yes that started as a wave and then it kind of went to a hockey stick. Yeah. So, you know, we learned the value of being able to control your growth which is a skill in itself, you know, because we were doing our own manufacturing and with the growth we got into gourmet food stores and people were paying about Six dollars a bag has anybody here have a had the pita chips

2 (2m 4s):
as anybody has a pita chips. Are you

1 (2m 6s):
kidding me? Well, you know what I used to I used to ask that when I would go speak somewhere there be like five hands in the audience and I'd start explaining. Well a pita chip. We take some bread and we season it we cut it. Anyway, I'm glad I don't have to go that back that far anymore, but we started in gourmet food stores from there. We were in natural food stores and we always Just had pure ingredients. We didn't you know, the whole natural food boom and we were just automatically natural. I mean there was really nothing in it. There were like three or four ingredients. So we didn't actually have to do anything. When all these other companies were trying to make themselves natural. We're like, hey, we already are there was a

2 (2m 47s):
point pretty early on because at the beginning Mark was cutting the pita into chips by hand.

1 (2m 53s):
I told you had a really big bright right bicep, right? Yeah

2 (2m 56s):
and eventually to just kind of grow it wasn't like you went out to a bunch of Private Equity companies. You can really raise money right here. We were just kind of funding the business through the sale of pita chips

1 (3m 6s):
through the sale of pita chips and running up our credit cards, you know, beg steal borrow driving a crappy car or whatever it is. You had to

2 (3m 15s):
do have it. How did you do it? I was talking to some attendees earlier and they were same story. You know, how do I grow this thing? I don't you know, I'm also worried that you know, when I put my product on the world a bigger company will see it in just replicate it and crush me that could have happened. And so easily pita chips are pretty easy to replicate. You can't patent them.

1 (3m 34s):
Right? You can't patent them and they're not that easy.

2 (3m 38s):
Okay. Sorry, I'm

1 (3m 39s):
sorry. You can

2 (3m 44s):
imagine that a Frito-Lay or why is it like, you know, huge company could figure out, you know, some kind of competitive product right how and you didn't have a whole lot of money. So, how are you doing that? How are how are you investing in? How did you even have a Place to make them was the rent cheap guy. I think you're like Lynn, Massachusetts or something like that.

1 (4m 4s):
Yeah and Randolph Mass and fact we still there but initially we started off borrowing some space from a woman who made pretzels right? And it was when we started having to install some of our own own equipment that we had to then find a bigger space. So we found a space in a construction type building super nice landlords and he sectioned off. You know 5,000 square feet and then we were growing bigger and he and he was on the other side and he's like, well, I can just move them wall over and he moved the wall over. We took 10,000 square feet and then he's like well, I can just move out and then we took 20,000 square feet and then when we started grow even further that's when we looked literally one driveway over was this mattress factory for sale

2 (4m 53s):
and you took a loan right a bank loan for that?

1 (4m 55s):
Yes. We had a bank loan for that and I said well, can I get Half a million because then we have to move and they initially said no no not without equity and then I went out and I got accounts and got letters from Airlines and and things like that and

2 (5m 12s):
their lines you said we want to go we're going to base and no.

1 (5m 16s):
Yeah, if you can make them likely write that down.

2 (5m 20s):
Yeah, and that's how you were able to secure the loan. Yes. I mean did you I mean now of course, you know, the lure is to go out and seek capital and to raise money and At that time was that even something you would Mark considered

1 (5m 33s):
doing we did we considered raising Capital. It takes a lot of time and effort and I don't have a business background and none of us did are you a social worker that has your back or so worker? They were psychologists anytime I have to do math. I go to my sister because she's got an MBA and I'm like, you know, so we were just about to take on financing which is when we landed the Trader Joe's account. And so we started doing higher volume and then such a nice company. They would pay before they even got the product. Yeah. Yeah. It was unusual. Yeah, they pay really quickly. And so I ended up all of a sudden we were getting money and we were kind of used and the chips were really selling.

1 (6m 16s):
So we used the money that we got in from Trader Joe's to really fund the business and and help us grow. So we never ended up taking on any extra outside money,

2 (6m 26s):
which was a very fortunate decision. Remember the podcast you said something to me that really resonated. You said by the mid-2000s you had your daughters and you said the business really started to run you I have talked to so many people who've been on the show that say If you think you're going to run this business understand the business is going to run you I think Angie and Dan Bastion of Boom Chicka Pop also said a version of that. What was that? What was that period like, I mean that was when you I guess Hard to think about maybe I don't want to do this anymore.

1 (7m 3s):
Yeah, I think at the time I still would have done it but I think Mark was like there was all these things that he didn't get to do that he wanted to do he wanted to go off and he wanted to travel and he wanted to do all these things and yet we're still growing really quickly and we had been approached by five of the largest food conglomerates that there are in the world asking us to sell and it was a lie. Lot, it was you know, I'm breastfeeding in the closet. I got the and it was and so the business was really started to dictate Our Lives versus us doing what we love to do and making a living at it.

1 (7m 44s):
And so that's when we decided Well, I think maybe we should think about selling. You know, I'm really

2 (7m 50s):
interested in this idea of passion, right? We're told we're often we often hear Follow Your Passion, which is not actually possible for many people, you know, follow your passion. What you're passionate may not be able to afford you a sustainable life. We're pita chips was at a passion. I mean, were you and Mark really following that passion or did it become a passion once you started to really pursue it.

1 (8m 14s):
It wasn't the pita chips per se. It was just like we were in the food business where we both wanted to be but I feel like it becomes more of a passion when other people start to believe in you when transitions from This crazy idea and you guys have graduate degrees and you've got loans and when all of a sudden when it starts selling and other people start believing in you and then you start to develop your team and P other people start like wanting to work for you and quitting their jobs. And then you're responsible for them making a living and that all is like then it really becomes a you know, yeah

2 (8m 55s):
passion, you know, I'm interested in you have a new company that you The you obviously sold Stacy's you're not involved with the company formally anymore. You've got the this new company called be bold energy bars. You've got a juice bar Needham Massachusetts near to where you live. This is a start up all over again. Obviously, the stakes are different because you are financially secure. It's not a make-or-break, but of course you want it to work and you want it to be successful. Do you have some of that same kind of anxiety and energy you did when you were starting Stacy's now with be bold is there? Some overlap in that

1 (9m 30s):
feeling. Yes, you know. I'm at my juice bar and I'm selling all of these bars, you know the handmade in the back with the mixer once again, you know, it's I didn't start anything big you've got a mixer going in the back and and you know, we mix press and package and and I have to say it's no less nerve-wracking starting another company, especially not like now people expect something from us pressures on yeah. The pressure is on and when we reached out to some of the people that worked with At the pita chip company and said, you know, do you want to become a part of the team and we started to get people now our CEO? Oh she was with Quaker and then with Jim Beam, and now she we called her up.

1 (10m 12s):
And we said well, we're starting this company and I think about it take a week. She talked to your husband two days later. She called us back and she said amen well and when she I mean like that's a real job. Like I keep thinking of real job, and she's quitting her real job to come with us and You know and do this and you know, it was about that nervous about it and not only that but it's like hey, you know what it gave us this other sense this additional sense of confidence and belief that you know, we can do this if we can do this again and even when my brother came on board and he's just sitting in the juice bar watching these people buying these bars and buying these bars.

1 (10m 52s):
He's my number one

2 (10m 53s):
believer. So be bold. How big do you want? Do you want it to be do you want it to be

1 (10m 58s):
I'm doing what I love. To do now again the so again there is no exit strategy. Yeah. We just want to have a you know, it's a refrigerated bar and I almost feel felt remiss just selling it in my local juice bar and having so many people love it and then not putting it out on the market because everybody is going to love it.

2 (11m 20s):
They are called be bold bars. This is Stacy Madison. She is the founder of Stacy's Pita Chips. Thank you so much for being here. We appreciate it so much. So much. It's been great having

1 (11m 30s):
you thank you so much. So I get that walk off

2 (11m 32s):
music get it wet a little round of applause another round of

1 (11m 35s):
blood.

2 (11m 40s):
That's Stacey Madison. She's the co-founder of Stacy's Pita Chips and founder of be bold energy bars Stacy join me live on stage at the how I built the summit which happened in October at yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco. We've got one more of my conversations from the summit left and it will be in your feed in. A few weeks. So keep checking for updates. Thanks to JC Howard who produced this episode and REM teen Arab Louis wrote the music. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this. This is NPR.