2 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business? They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business. Hey everyone. So today we've got another one of my conversations from the how I built this Summit that took place in San Francisco back. Back in October and this one is with David Neil Elman the founder of JetBlue and if you heard the original episode with David, you might remember some of the crazy highs and lows of his story at the age of 29.

2 (44s):
He was already the president of regional Airline. And when that Airline was acquired by Southwest David became a top executive there. It was a dream job until he got fired just a few months later So eventually David launched another airline jet blue. And it took in a hundred million dollars in its first year, but after one particularly bad ice storm and a public relations disaster David was ousted by the board. He had to walk away from his own company. So what did he do next? He started yet another airline Azul in Brazil in this interview. David was really open about all these ups and downs and the frustration that he felt along the way so at the summit I asked him how How he developed the resilience to deal with it all on the podcast you talked about how as a young man.

2 (1m 37s):
You did a mission as a Mormon you went to Brazil and you had to spend a lot of time knocking on doors and having those doors slammed in your face, and I'm curious to sort of talk more about the connection between that experience and your ability as an early-stage entrepreneur to handle the kind of rejection you would

1 (1m 57s):
face. It was interesting because before Went and did this, you know my mission experience. I had not succeeded really anything in my life. You know, I've talked a lot about my attention deficit disorder, which I really didn't know I had I just thought I was really stupid. You know, I because I couldn't really learn in school. If you asked me today. What books did you read in high school? I can't tell you one single book. I read in high school. I went to Public School in Utah, but I don't know I'm people talk about Kill a Mockingbird and I didn't read that book. I didn't read these books. So Because I couldn't you know, I didn't I was functionally illiterate

2 (2m 34s):
you couldn't sit down and absorb a book. I could is your braces

1 (2m 36s):
1/9 was I can tell you everything I was thinking about when I read that page except for what was on that page? Yeah, and so I hadn't had any success. I went to the ACT test. I think I got 16 on it and my advisor said look you had a tan the English section. If you'd just put C on any question you would have got 12, you know, so I felt like your people that kids had pretty sharp kid, but But I just didn't have any confidence. So being able to go and have this experience at 19 years of age be plucked from your life and put into a completely different environment and to be able to learn a foreign language and to be able to kind of learn from a new land and it just had a profound influence on me and it changed my life in ways that you know, two years of that that I couldn't have gotten in college and I came home confident and I felt like I could do anything.

2 (3m 29s):
Yeah, I mean one of the things Things that we've talked about and you've use of note of the passes that there seems to be a high number of entrepreneurs who've been on the show who have attention deficit disorder or some form of it. Yeah, either diagnosed or

1 (3m 41s):
undiagnosed I'm having attention deficit disorder is a struggle in school. But you know, you got to have some positives from it. And when I first found out I had it and I self-diagnose myself because my mom sent me this book called driven to distraction was like 21 criteria and it was all negative things, you know, like Can't your disorganize you can't get started you and I was everyone single one of those and I got to the last one and it said you have this unusual ability to hyper-focus. And when you hyper focus on something you're the best in the world at it, you can absolutely become a world expert in no time at all. Because if you obsessed with it, and it becomes part of you and I said, well that that's me and so you have that all that kind of negative stuff, which you can solve by just hiring good people.

1 (4m 30s):
People that can fix all that and then you have this ability just to hone in on things and just to take really complicated things and just simplify them. Mmm, you know, my teams are always just like David it's not that simple as like, yes it is. It's not that complicated. So you look at this complex solution you simplify it and you put yourself in the shoes of the consumer and you can just create something, you know, a lot of you here are entrepreneurs, but if you're not in the shower every morning, Running and your mind isn't racing a hundred miles an hour about something that you're going to do different than everybody else and you're excited to just get out and get dried off and get dressed and start your day because you have this idea.

1 (5m 13s):
This is gripping you then, you know, maybe you're not an entrepreneur, you know, and it's something that just, you know comes from

2 (5m 20s):
within. Well, I want to kind of drill down on this idea because I mean you could make the argument like with optimism or greater perseverance that it's intuitive right that to be an entrepreneur is intuitive. I'm not so sure that I believe that I mean based on all the people who've been on the show. I think there are some people who just are not, you know, you wouldn't Peg them to be entrepreneurs Eileen Fisher for example, who created an incredibly successful clothing line Yvonne Shannara to Patagonia doesn't naturally you wouldn't actually a study think that he would be an entrepreneur. I wonder whether you know, it's something like for you you get up in the morning. You're in the shower. You can't stop thinking about this idea. You can't stop thing about the next idea but I can't help but think that it's something that you can also develop and and

1 (6m 6s):
cultivate. Yeah, I think you can I mean it's harder. I mean, I have a son who started a company in college. He's making like $100 a day profit from starting a little company on campus. I remember talking to his teacher in the third grade and she said Seth just sits in the back of the room and he comes up with stuff out of the blue that we've never even thought of before. You know, it we'd like how did he ask Question, you know and you know not scholastically straight A's from when he was a little kid, but you just have this ability innate ability to think things differently. Now you train yourself to do that? Yes, you can but it takes a lot of work and you know, I had this thought the other day while I was listening to your podcast for every person that makes it on your podcast.

1 (6m 50s):
I wonder how many tens of thousands or millions and never made it, you know, it's hard and it takes a lot of perseverance you can do it and that's exciting and each one of you in this room can make it happen, but But just by saying it and wanting to be it doesn't mean it.

2 (7m 3s):
So a lot of businesses describe themselves as customer-focused which is what you should be right you kind of bake that into the the whole idea around JetBlue. And in fact in really for a long time, you would fly on the planes you would walk up and down the aisles. You would ask people to give me some feedback. Was it more gimmicky or was that actually really actionable and important for you to do to make that a success? Cecil brand

1 (7m 32s):
it's all the above. I mean, I think you know I have a rule at Azul

2 (7m 37s):
Azul is the bit. I think the third biggest airline in

1 (7m 40s):
Brasilia. What's the largest in terms of value? And we have a thousand flights a day. We serve a hundred Seventeen cities. It's

2 (7m 45s):
Anna mainly

1 (7m 47s):
domestic fly messy, but we also fly to Europe and we find the United States, right? So every single one of our directors or VPS when they plan to fly, they have to talk to every single customer on the flight. Hmm. What does that do? Number one? One it takes these people from behind their desks put some on an airplane and they're listening to what people are saying about our business. It puts him closer to the customer and realizes that we're not as good as we think we are sometimes now, we have all kinds of dashboards and metrics that shows on time percentage and NPS scores and all that kind of stuff, but just talking to a customer saying I'm a frequent flyer. I can't redo my points, you know or whatever. There's just all kinds of things that you have are complaining about how fares or whatever.

1 (8m 30s):
It just keeps our management team in touch with our with our customers and then when CEOs on a planet he talks to a customer has a huge impact on them. I mean one time I was in Salt Lake City at JetBlue we have all of our reservationist said JetBlue are in their home. They don't work at office so you can call someone in their in their furry bath slippers or in a robe or whatever. So I was in a group like this with about 300 of our people and I said how many of you have spoken? To someone who have spoken to me on airplane and almost every single hand went up. Hmm. So that was a mark for them. Hey, I talked to your CEO on the airplane. It wasn't just that. I talked to those people.

1 (9m 11s):
It's just that these 300 people knew that I talked to people on airplanes and and that was important to them that I was the kind of CEO that would talk to the customers. It's just a cultural thing and it's it's symbolic, but it's also very important and it keeps us in touch with our customers

2 (9m 26s):
mean there's a flip side to that right? So if you think of an airline like Spirit there You proposition is it's cheap and they're very open about it. I mean I've had good experiences on it, but that's not what they're selling. They are selling a cheap cheap ticket JetBlue Southwest. They're selling an experience. They want you to feel good when you're on their planes and feel good about the price you paid but when there's a crisis like there was in 2007. There was a big blizzard JetBlue Airlines were grounded. You got a disproportionate amount of the grief for that. Yeah. I did. Did you almost Most set yourself up for that because you said look we are all about the customer. We're all about. You

1 (10m 6s):
know, I think in that case there were there all the customers. I mean, I

2 (10m 10s):
wish you'd just briefly explain the planes were grounded. There's a blizzard people were stuck on the

1 (10m 14s):
tarmac erasers ice pellets. And so the it was some the FAA had come up this rule just lasted that one year 2007. That was it. They said if you have ice pellets, you can't take off people were on airplanes. It wasn't really my responsibility. It was our CEO. Oh to take care of it, but I took her. Possibility it started with Today Show in the morning and I ended with Letterman at night and I did 20 interviews in between and we created a customer Bill of Rights. We took a media hit but within two weeks because of the customer bill writes thinks had returned. The only people that weren't convinced was the gel blueboard that kind of I don't know what they were thinking they kind of lost their way and they had decided to take the Cielo who was in charge of the company that time and make him the CEO.

2 (10m 56s):
Yeah. I mean you were you were just to make a planar mean you were pushed out of the company that you created. Yeah. Yeah, and you're not involved with it anymore today.

1 (11m 6s):
Well, I'm a shareholder this current CEO. Thank goodness. The board now has him there. He's good guy calls me all the time for advice and we

2 (11m 13s):
talked and you still fly JetBlue all the time

1 (11m 16s):
for free. I love it. So does my family so we all we all we all love Joe blue. So but you know, the company had some some academics. Our board that start thinking oh, this is the entrepreneurs dilemma. It's time to kind of turn this over to Professional Management. Let's do this and kick David up to be the chairman and you know, I don't I think there's nothing like an entrepreneur, you know, there might be isolated cases where the entrepreneur dilemma, you know is the case but in most cases there's just nothing that can substitute for the passion and so on I'd love to do a business case.

1 (11m 56s):
I teach courses at Stanford actually with my high school diploma. I don't even have a a college degree and so and so I teach a couple different courses and I would love to say okay how you do it in business school. You're like, okay. Here's the case. This is what happened. Now you determine if the removal of this entrepreneur as the head based on what happened in the last 12 years was a smart decision by the board or a bad decision by the board. I would I would love to have that case come and debate that yeah, and personally, I mean I've gone on to, you know, create a xulhaz is an amazing company and I you know, I think I said this on the podcast but I've got 15,000 people that work for me in as well.

1 (12m 42s):
And we actually serve a our people every year and ask them. Hey, do you like us do you like the job we're doing how do you like your job? How you like your salary? Hey like your benefits. How do you like the way your supervisor treats you and the scores there or just unbelievable. I've never seen 87% of our people just love it and the Mantra down there is we want this to be the best job your life. So I walk around every bad guy. Is this the best job of your life? Is this the best time of your life is there? They're like and if they hesitate a why not. Why not? What can we do better? I want to ask a

2 (13m 11s):
bit more about how you motivate employees that I remember Howard Schultz was talking about Starbucks and some of the things they do to make sure that their employees are, you know feel fulfilled and they actually have some of the lowest employee turnover rates in the food business. I mean, this is important right? Because when you lose an employee, it's really expensive you want to retain employees. The airline business is really tough being a flight attendant is a tough job you you're on the front lines of customer complaints. Lancer if you're the ticket encounter or at the gate and you're getting a lot of abuse, what do you do? I mean you mention that you walk around and say is this the best job you've had but of course, you're David Neelam in your the founder and they're gonna guess it's the best job I've ever had, you know, right they're not going to say no.

2 (13m 52s):
It sucks. I mean, this is an important part of a business and culture right? Even if you're on a building a business on a small scale. How do you make sure that that is the first second or third most important thing you do?

1 (14m 8s):
It's just critical. I mean if you are in a service business, you have to figure out how to make people excited about coming to work or at least filled make them feel that they don't dread coming to work. I want really wanted to someone to kind of wake up in the morning and say it's work day and not say I hate my job and I think it all starts with hiring people with the right attitude. I mean, some people just don't like nice to say this to juggle all the time. We get hundreds of thousands of resumes. We really got to find out if you like people It's okay. If you don't like people it's okay. Just don't work for us, you know, and I think some people are just wired different than other so you have to start with the right people and then you have to train him really well and you have to create expectations and you have to support him and you have to give them great tools to work with and and new airplanes and great you looking uniforms and then you have to stand behind them and you have to teach him look if you co and you be nice to people and they love you, and they appreciate.

1 (15m 7s):
Do your jobs just a lot more fun. If you go and just be angry people and treat them like garbage then they treat you like garbage and then you hate your job. So how difficult is that? Yeah, just be nice to people. I mean, I remember one time I was talking to one of our agents at the airport in Buffalo New York, and she says I love my job so much and she goes I know I'm a celebrity in my town because I work for JetBlue I said, what do you mean she goes? No, I go to the bank to cash my check and I said you should Water deposit, but and the bank teller said, oh you work for JetBlue. What's it like to work for that great company. I love JetBlue, huh? And she goes I smile and then I go to church and some of them who yells.

1 (15m 48s):
Hey JetBlue. Hey JetBlue, and and so and then I went on my day off. I wear all my job blew a tire because people just love me because I work for Jeff blue. It's like so that's what you want to create. You know, you want to create a brand where people are excited to work for you because you're helping other people you're helping them find their, you know, get to their family members and And that's what you have to try to do. And if you can do that, you're going to have a company that will be more successful will make more money and you'll be a success.

2 (16m 17s):
That's David Neil Elman founder of JetBlue and that zul Brazilian Airlines and just recently announced plans to launch a brand new company. Three's Airways a low-cost airline based out of Salt Lake City. David join me live on stage at the how I built this Summit which happened in October and yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Cisco will have more of my conversations from the summit over the next few weeks keep checking for updates and thanks to JC Howard who produced this episode and rub teen Arab Louis who wrote the music and Guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this. This is NPR.