1 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business? They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business. One more thing before we start the show a lot of you ask how can I support how I built this and really the best way to support what we do is by supporting your local public radio station, which broadcast the show on there are waves here at NPR. We're launching our annual fundraising Campaign, which runs all the way to December 31st.

1 (40s):
So if you want to support your local public radio station, please consider donating by going to donate dot npr.org / built and thanks. Alright, so today we've got another one of my conversations from the how I built this Summit that happened in San Francisco a few months ago. This one is with Troy Carter. Troy made his name in the music business as a manager for several artists including one of the most successful pop artists in the world. He founded his own management company became an investor an adviser to Spotify and all around creative force. And if you remember his original episode of the podcast that ran, Back in 2017.

1 (1m 21s):
Troy talked about starting out as a scrappy kid in West Philadelphia and getting his start in the music industry with help from Will Smith. Anyway in this conversation from the 2019 HIV T Summit that you are about to hear Troy offered up some really good advice about staying Scrappy and about not being afraid or intimidated to ask for help. Especially when you feel like you don't know something because in his early days is a music manager Troy made a lot of mistakes. Takes he ran into a ton of debt and he almost lost everything but then he met a relatively unknown Singer went by the name of a Lady Gaga and when Troy join me live on stage at the summit.

1 (2m 3s):
He told me how meeting her and becoming her manager turned everything around. What what struck you about her? I mean it's almost like being an investor where you can identify a founder or a company, but was it about her that you thought? Yep, she's got

3 (2m 20s):
something. You know, she was very unique in terms of her look, you know, and especially at that particular time, but also she played me like three or four songs that were just like smashes Paparazzi was actually one of the songs and also it was This level of hunger that she had and I think her getting dropped from Def Jam and you know and our dad had given her an ultimatum in terms of if you don't figure it out within a year, you know, you need to go back to school. Yes. I think her back was up against the wall and my back was up against the wall. So I think it was just that we're just going to have to go for this and can't take no for an answer.

3 (3m 1s):
Did you see A Star is Born? Yes,

1 (3m 3s):
I mean obviously not the story but there have to been some moments. Are you watching? At where you're thinking there's some parallels to what happened in real life with her.

3 (3m 12s):
There were a lot of parallels that I saw, you know, especially with you know, I remember people telling her she was going to have to get a nose job, you know, because you know, her nose was too big to be a pop star or she was going to have to give her these songs to the Pussycat Dolls because he wasn't famous enough or this record needed to go to Britney Spears, you know, so seeing her like in real life fight for it, you know it there were a lot of parallels.

1 (3m 38s):
I mean, it wasn't just you know, sort of signing her and representing her and you guys went on the road in a van. She made her own clothing. I think you even helped so on glass beads to

3 (3m 52s):
yes to see what take mirror and crack the mirror and then glued a mirror onto a bra and panties and that was like the outfit. This is before we get a 4-2 stylist though. I mean Troy did you at the time but now somebody would charge us like $60,000 should at singing horse, right?

1 (4m 15s):
It's amazing because both of you at that moment you didn't know it but you really didn't need each other. You were the right person for her. She was the right person for you. But did you I guess you didn't really know that right?

3 (4m 29s):
No, you know what it's you know, a lot of times, you know, you may have like a business relationship with somebody and but I think the difference was you know, it was we were very very very close in terms of just Spending that time together on the road and it's like you're on a tour bus and yet you're going to place the place around the world. You learn a lot about each other at that point. And so I personally felt the sense of protection and so where it went beyond just bit a business relationship. It was actually this level of you got to protect your friend.

3 (5m 9s):
So you negotiate and with that lens on yeah, but when you're putting the music out there you want the world to hear it, you know, so I played the music for everybody. I would keep CDs in my car back then and I put them in my backpack. So when I went into meetings with people, I just be had hand out

1 (5m 27s):
CDs and was part of you worried in your vet investing a lot of time and Sweat Equity in this thing. You were putting a lot of hours into it. I mean, that's a gamble right

3 (5m 37s):
because I was unemployed so I don't have anything else to do, you know, and and It wasn't a matter of if as much as it was when for me really what Gaga but you do worry about the win. Yeah, because while you're going through the when there's no income no income. So people still calling you for Bill unpaid bills, you know, it's I had debt out of the yin-yang so so for me it was what's going to come first. That's where the fear came was was the I know we'll get there but we'll the bottom drop out on something before it

1 (6m 19s):
happens. Yeah, I mean there are so many parallels between that experience in a start-up. We had an episode with Chris sarue and logic these guys met in the early 20s. Both of them unknowns both of them, you know, no connections and they very slowly and methodically built up logic by strategically giving away his music and playing smaller venues and then bigger venues and bigger venues to He released his first album. It went to the top of the charts and it really was a business that they built. This was a start-up. I mean you guys were a start-up

3 (6m 54s):
right? Definitely and you hit it on the nose. There are a lot of parallels, you know, and especially coming from hip-hop. You know what Chris and logic did was similar to what we did back in a day in terms of mixtapes. So that was our free model

1 (7m 8s):
so it make tapes and give them away and

3 (7m 9s):
you give them away. So basically this is your entry point. Point to this artist, so we're not going to put a pay wall in front of it. But back then we would have never known that terminology or anything but instinctively you just want to get it out to as many people as possible and then maybe they'll buy a ticket to the show and maybe they'll start buying merchandise or request you on the radio. And and and to me I think this new generation of artists because of the technological tools are able to do it even better because you have SoundCloud and YouTube and places like

1 (7m 42s):
that. It's interesting because in the

3 (7m 44s):
It

1 (7m 44s):
business today right artists are not really necessarily making their money off music with with the exception of some of them right there making money from other things like touring. I just went to see logic in concert and I was amazed the line for the merchandise was so long people were waiting for an hour to buy merchandise and I stop and ask somebody said, why are you waiting on watch this buy it online. They said you can only get it at the shows. Right? I mean that is a big

3 (8m 11s):
part of of the business was You know, unfortunately, it's always been through the history of a business record income traditionally has been yes smallest piece at a pie because record labels have screwed over artist for Generations. So you always forced to go on the road and sell merchandise and do all of these other things to subsidize the income essentially, but we're starting to see a generation of Independent Artists. Now that have broken that barrier that are starting to make money off. Music as well because they're putting out this music. The record labels are discovering them because they've already blown up essentially.

3 (8m 51s):
Yeah, and so they have to give them better terms on the deals and we're streaming if you get a hit streaming, it's becomes a gift that keeps on giving so we're starting to see that that barrier break and more artists make a living

1 (9m 3s):
you grew up in West Philly and you didn't grow up with a lot of money and you grew up with financial insecurity and then experiencing Financial collapse. Sin, you know as a younger man after having had some money right because you sold a company and you made money and you bought a house and then all of a sudden everything collapsed you said you developed PTSD based, you know, sort of financial PTSD and that it was really hard for you to forget that feeling as successful as you are now. We're going to talk a little bit about some of the things you've been doing is do you still have that Financial PTSD in your mind all the

3 (9m 40s):
time? Absolutely absolutely

1 (9m 43s):
feel like you're All potentially just one, you know bad luck day away from

3 (9m 48s):
collapse. No, you know, it's not even money as much as it is, you know, it's funny because like I'll talk to some of my friends who you know are successful entrepreneurs or business owners, but grew up, you know middle class or whatever, right? So it's a different set of worries when it comes to running a business and or being an entrepreneur or In Risk taken. So risk taken in my mind almost, you know because it was existential for so long. Yeah. It's like that feeling still is like this undercurrent that still that still lives there. But also in the I love how you call it.

3 (10m 30s):
What did you call it? I grew up with financial insecurity. We were broke. I was like, that's a really nice way of putting it. No, we were we were broke and we had to choose between having to pay a light bill or our gasket and cut off or so sometimes some days we wouldn't have hot water so we will have to go to my grandmother's house or whatever or I would have to go. It's like I still hate the smell of kerosene because we I used to have to go out and with a shopping cart in the kerosene can get kerosene from the gas station and that's how we heat it our house.

3 (11m 14s):
House was kerosene and you boil your water on top of the kerosene heater and you put it in the sink and that's what you washed up with in the mornings. So this isn't like 1920s or you know, anything like that or whatever so like so for me, I think it's that appreciation of wow. I can't believe this is my life and I was laughing with Kevin Hart and Kevin from Philly and we were having a conversation years ago about do you ever think that you're in a coma sometimes and you might just wake up and all of this just might be gone.

3 (11m 55s):
That's like yes, like this would be the dream of all time if I woke up and I'm going to get kissing. So so that those that's that's the sort of undercut. That's the

1 (12m 8s):
undercurrent do you think there's a connection between your background and your tolerance for risk or in tolerance for risk?

3 (12m 17s):
You know, I think the risk tolerance sort of changes depending on what stage I was at in life, but I'm a risk-taker by nature and I'm not quite sure where it came from. My mom was not a risk taker is like, you know, same job for 30 years and like, you know it was You know really about you know stability. Like how can I just be stable? But for me, I think working with Will Will taught me very early on about sort of thoughts become things and we'll had this thing where his manager JL is the most stable person.

3 (12m 57s):
I know like just very very conservative. So and those two have been together for over 30 something years. So we'll had this Where will would jump out the window and jails figuring out how to build the parachute as well as jumping out the window, right? And so I think it's just sort of balance of being around those guys for so long that I was able to kind of pull from

1 (13m 22s):
I want to ask you about since since you worked with Lady Gaga you created Adam Factory management company you've invested in Uber and Lyft and Warby Parker did on you well done. You've been a guest host on shop. Shark Tank, you have your now in a position where you invest in companies you help people build and make things. What do you what do you look for in businesses? I mean, what do you look for in people who are who come to you and say hey Troy, this is what I do. Are you looking at what they do or who they

3 (13m 57s):
are? I think both most of entrepreneurs that we invested in haven't done anything in that space that They're getting ready to go into. Yeah, but when you have a Founder who is hungry willing to learn self-aware takes feedback. You got a reason for doing it like a real reason to do it and a lot of times that reason isn't to get rich. It's like you really are on a mission to do whatever that thing is and you know recently, you know, I'm so proud of this entrepreneur we I met him in Detroit probably five years ago.

3 (14m 42s):
We would do these pop-up labs and different cities where we would just meet with entrepreneurs and this kit came out and from Detroit Street kid. I think his dad got killed when he was, you know, like a toddler and but he followed us, you know around for three days throughout the troit couple years later. He I saw Matt a Clippers game in La I'm like, what are you doing here? He's like I'm Of here, you know, you know he's going to be an entrepreneur and he actually connected with my partner's Susie Susie introduces them to the science lab, which is a tech accelerator and fast forward.

3 (15m 23s):
I think his companies raised 96 million dollars and is an Esports company, but for high school students, this is a guy with out the pedigree not Silicon Valley but hungry curious. Is no plan B. Those are the type of entrepreneurs that they're Unstoppable. Yeah, because you know, I hope this becomes the company that you know, we all wanted to become but if it doesn't his next one might be or the one after that is going to be but it's the way he's wired that he's destined for Success.

1 (15m 57s):
You didn't you made a very conscious decision probably about 10 years ago or even longer that you want to Pivot to become an investor. You really wanted. That's what you wanted to pursue and you You've done very well. I mean how much of your journey do you attribute to your willingness and desire and interest in just being a learner just sort of sitting down and saying I don't know telling people I don't know I can you teach me can you tell me

3 (16m 23s):
I do it all the time. What I've learned is if I'm humble enough to ask the questions then 99.9% of the time somebody is going to be humble enough to give me the answers. You know, I'm very Keen on not wasting people's time and you know being prepared with, you know, the questions I want to ask, but the curiosity is what keeps me ticking. That's my

1 (16m 47s):
fuel. I love it Troy Carter. Thank

3 (16m 50s):
you. Thank you again for coming here. Let's try Carter.

1 (16m 57s):
He's an investor and former manager for Lady Gaga. Troy join me live on stage at the how I built the summit which happened in October at yerba buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco. We're going to be running more conversations from the summit on Thursdays through the new year and next week. We've got Kevin Systrom and Mike Krieger cofounders of Instagram. Thanks to JC Howard who produced this episode and R Mt. Narrow blue who wrote the music? I'm guy. Roz and you're listening to how I built this This is

3 (17m 32s):
NPR.