1 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're thinking creatively during such a disruptive time. And today we're going to hear from Alberto Perlman co-founder of Zumba. Zumba is a fitness program that combines Latin dance and aerobics. It's popular all over the world. But now of course many gyms and fitness studios are closed leaving Zumba instructors without a place to teach So to keep people moving Alberto's team got into action and built a virtual platform in just a few weeks for people who don't know much about it. Just how do you describe Zumba?

3 (41s):
How will Zumba is a I think it's a largest branded Fitness community in the world. We have pre-pandemic over 15 million people who take Zumba classes every week and we're in a hundred eighty six countries and pre-pandemic we were in 200. Thousand locations. We don't own the locations. We have instructors teaching those locations some instructors own their own location and some instructors work for somebody else. But we are a fitness Community cultural Community a musical Community a community of people that just come together and have fun and get healthy and happy and

1 (1m 23s):
basically you you trained instructors and then you license the brand and the program to instructors around. Around the world and those instructors are like they're like the entrepreneurs. I mean, they run their own Zumba business. Yeah, that's we

3 (1m 36s):
enable them to go out and create their business or work for someone and generate income doing what they love. That is the most important thing if people love dancing people love interacting with other people people love leading then they get trained this it can actually make money doing something that they really really

1 (1m 55s):
love Alberto. You know, we had John Foley a Peloton on a couple weeks ago and Say the link in a bar 3 obviously the industry as a whole it's just been absolutely decimated. Right? I mean 24 Hour Fitness file for bankruptcy gyms across the country are struggling many of them may not survive at the same time working from home is really you know, anybody who's tried to get dumbbells online knows it's impossible to find them right now, right? I heard there's a black market for dumbbells. Yeah, how has the economic crisis affected Zumba?

3 (2m 27s):
So so we set out and said, let's base. Is our response to the pandemic and we started seeing this in January and February because we have instructors in China and our instructors and China were telling us. Hey, this is really bad you guys have to prepare for this because if this gets out this is not good. So we said we have to do three things one most important thing. How do we continue to help ourselves your state generate income to how do we deliver education virtually for people new people want to become instructors or our existing instructors who need? Further education, especially if they're transitioning to Virtual and 3. How do we keep our promise to make the world happy and healthy.

3 (3m 8s):
The first thing we did was we allowed our instructors to start teaching online and they started teaching on Zoom. But parallel to that we started developing our own platform and it's called Zen studios in stands for Zumba instructor your network. So since studio and this studio allows instructors to livestream their classes, it allows them to upload. The glasses with a licensed music it allows them to charge for their classes. It allows them to list their classes on a platform on Zuma.com. We really focus on this in studio concept to help our instructors generate income during the lockdown. And at the same time we said we are instructors are not necessarily trained in using all this technology.

3 (3m 51s):
So we better provide all the education that they need. So we created all these courses that were done through zoom and some our e-learning courses that Truckers could take to become what we call virtual Fitness pros and to our surprise within a month and a half we had about a million people a week taking Zumba classes virtually, which is amazing for a new virtual product. It was really on instructors telling their students. Hey now, I'm teaching online and come take my class virtually in every week. We launched improvements to the platform. So we added chat to the platform. So students can chat while you're taking the class. We added emojis.

3 (4m 32s):
We added the things to the pay wall. So that instructors could take payment which every week. We're launching a new tech at a pace that our technology team had never done so before and I'm so proud of them because they really took it to the next level.

1 (4m 47s):
Yeah. I mean you basically stood up a virtual platform within weeks. I mean, I'm imagining that if you had a plan like let's say a year ago you said hey we want to do a virtual platform. It would have taken you like a year. Or to put together, right? And you do this in like six weeks.

3 (5m 4s):
Yeah on both people working nights weekends. It felt like we were starting Zoom again. It felt like you know how Jeff besos says they won. It really felt like they won. We felt Unstoppable. We were going at it. We were talking to instructors to get feedback on how to make the platform perfect for them. And at the same time we said, we need to also help our instructors and the World At Large during the the pandemic in other. Ways so we created a Community Fund where we gave funds out to instructors who were directly affected by covid themselves who were hospitalized who had family members that passed away or instructors that were because our instructors sometimes are assumed by their side job.

3 (5m 47s):
So we had a lot of instructors who are nurses a lot huge population of nurses who are also Zoom instructors. So we help them their Frontline workers. We help them with childcare services. So we created this Community Fund and we also Something that we call the one class one meal program for every person who took a virtual class, which we make no revenue on all the revenue goes to the instructors for every person takes a virtual class. We've donated a meal and during the month of June and we donated 1.1 million meals to food banks around the

1 (6m 18s):
world. Wow, so Alberto, so when when somebody signs up for a virtual class on the Zumba platform all that revenue and pays for it goes to the instructor. Yeah. Everything goes the instructor. Wow, so I mean, how are you? Guys, I mean, you know, you're still a business you still have employees. How are you kind of managing the business and I mean have you had to have layoffs or furloughs? For example?

3 (6m 41s):
Yeah, so we didn't do any layoffs. We didn't do any furloughs surprisingly. Our clothing business is doing very well. People are buying fitness clothing to work out at home and we were able to manage it. Obviously, it's not going to be a very profitable year because we made a lot of Investments to make all these things. - but that's not our objective this year objective this year is about the people it's about the instructors. It's about their students. It's about our employees. It's always been that and this year. It's even more about a just helping out others and we'll be

1 (7m 16s):
fine. So basically if you are a Zumba instructor, obviously you you know, you pay a monthly license fee, but if you want to have virtual classes you can use this platform and all that money goes to you Zumba doesn't cut. Well.

3 (7m 29s):
Yeah, I know instructors. This is amazing. I know instructors who are making $25 a class teaching at the YMCA or $30 a class teaching at the YMCA. Suddenly when they switch to Virtual they're making $150 of class. So some of them are making more money than before the pandemic.

1 (7m 45s):
Well when you were on originally on the show a couple years ago, you talked about the 2008 financial crisis and all of a sudden you started to see an uptick in people training to become Zumba instructors because people were losing their jobs. Here we are. Once again in an even worse Financial economic crisis, are you saying it up taken in brand new people joining trying to learn how to become Zumba Zumba instructors.

3 (8m 9s):
So we are seeing people coming in. It's not as big as its 2008 and it's not as big as what we predicted was going to happen at the beginning of the year, but we are seeing every day A large group of people registering to become a Zumba instructors. It's not the same as the 2008 2008 was crazy and I think it's partly because there were So many people that were hanging out in at the gym in 2008-2009. They were laid off they were hanging out of the gym and and the fitness industry needed more

1 (8m 37s):
instructors. Yeah, of course, you know, I remember the other sort of shift for your business was when you made a huge pit because originally you guys made videos like Zoom home videos that were sold through infomercials and that's how you could learn how to become a Zumba instructor and you realize that that wasn't actually sustainable model you made a huge pivot to support. Meaning and to create a network instead of just selling videos this seems to me what you're doing now with virtual courses and training that seems to be the biggest pivot since your whole business model was established. Is that is that fair? I think our

3 (9m 14s):
pivot now. Yes, I think it's more than just the virtual piece is how do we pivot into a place where our instructors are going to have to be even more entrepreneurial than before? We don't know what's going to happen to the four walls or are great. Friends at 24-hour at Gold's even a lot of the boutique gyms. It's tough and we've been trying to help them and one of the ways we've helped is we really push their instructors and motivator instructors to teach outdoors and tell our Gym Partner's. Hey, our instructors can teach in parking lots in the parking lot at your gym and you can partner with them and host these classes there. And so that could generate some income for you or some instructors would say I'm going to go to the park and I'm going to talk to the park ranger and I'm going to rent Part for an hour and I'm going to charge $10 a person and I want to get 20 of my students to show up and I'll generate 200 dollars in revenue for my classes at the park and we're seeing every day to see more and more people teach Outdoors saw a huge glass happening in New York with the kind of like 300 people outdoor left in Central Park and some instructors have even doubled up and said, well, I'm going to teach outside or I'm going to teach socially distant.

3 (10m 30s):
Inside but I'm also going to stream at the same time. And so I can generate Revenue twice. I can generate revenue for my people who are live in person with me and I can do it at the same time with people all over the world so I can have some people from Korea and from Argentina and Brazil taking my class in at the same time. I mean my whole Hometown in New York teaching an outdoor class and generating revenue on both sides and making people happy.

1 (10m 55s):
Let me come back in just a moment Alberto tells us that a new exercise program that Helps you forget you just did 20 burpees and encourages you to do a few more stay with us. I'm guy rise and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR.

3 (11m 16s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to

1 (11m 23s):
build a more just and Equitable World. Learn

3 (11m 26s):
more at a jws

1 (11m 28s):
dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm talking with Alberto Perlman co-founder of Zumba and for Alberto and really for the whole Fitness industry. One of the big questions right now is how do you replicate the experience of an in-person class online? You know, one of the things that I remember you talking about in the episode was this concept that you called Fe J freeing electrifying Joy right this like idea that like 20 minutes into a Zumba class. You just like his own. You just like liberated from the world outside, you know this and anyone's taking a Zumba class probably knows I'm talking about.

1 (12m 10s):
Can you get that feeling when you're doing this

3 (12m 12s):
virtually as for we did a survey of people who have taken Zumba virtually and we interviewed over a hundred thousand people and fifty percent of them said that they started doing zumba virtually because they needed to stay in shape. But the main reason that they're doing it now is because of stress relief. It's like force meditation a little bit. It's like you have to follow Oh those dance moves your concentrated, you're listening to this amazing music all your other thoughts go away. It's just you the music the instructor and the movement and that's what's beautiful about Zumba. Is that moment that we call fetch, which is like our Zen what then is to yoga fetches to Zumba freeing

1 (12m 53s):
electrifying Joy. I'm going to I'm going to go to some questions from our viewers some Claire morishima. Hello Claire Claire asked like when you get tired of doing zumba, what do you Because you know you don't you probably don't do Zumba everyday. I know you exercise. So what other things do you do?

3 (13m 10s):
So strong nation is our new program, which is a high intensity interval training program. It's non-dance where you're doing a push-up a squat a burpee 10 Jacks and then you go into punching and kicking and we synchronize music to it. So we went to our favorite DJs DJs like Steve Aoki or producers and Timberland and we said, can you score music to this workout? Instead of the music being in the background. Let's score music just like you would score music to a movie like a training scene in a movie or like the movie a battle scene in the movie 300 and they created this very cool epic music that matches the work out completely. So if you take a strong Nation class, you can take virtual strong Nation classes, or you can take them Outdoors, or you can take them in gyms that are open and you feel like one with the music you feel like you are completely immersed in zuma was about fetch.

3 (14m 4s):
Strong nation is about hacking motivation. So this is like a remember Pavlov's dogs. Yeah, the Bell would ring in the dark would salivate. So we created a similar thing with music conditioning. So we're not counting how many burpees you're doing. It's every time that sound hits you're doing a burpee and suddenly you thought you could only do 20 and you just did 26 and it's because you were just hearing that sound and you are getting condition. So I'm really excited about strong Nation. We're getting a lot of people hiring strong Nation instructors to come teach them their backyards as almost like personal coaches personal trainer come teach me strong nation in my backyard because that's the workout. I want to do while I'm at home.

3 (14m 45s):
Yeah

1 (14m 46s):
walk me through a little bit how you guys are successfully doing virtual training and virtual instruction because not only are you onboarding new people, but you're also updating and offering continued instruction, but then like teaching people how to use the virtual platforms. I imagine that it was kind of a Keep hearing of the beginning right when you were trying to do this. Oh,

3 (15m 7s):
it was crazy there being any so we start off with helping our instructors get on Zoom. Right and zoom Google meet a Microsoft teams. They were teaching on these platforms and in a lot of audio issues or video issues. I think we're learning right there's a lot of different settings that you can use on these platforms. So there was a whole learning process and a lot of issues at the first few classes. Then we launched our own platform in our own platform we had To work out all the technical bugs and now the platform is incredible. Our platform has better video than I've ever seen in any other platform. That's what we wanted to focus on is video and audio being crystal-clear HD come through amazing.

3 (15m 48s):
And then we have to train our instructors, right that was a big piece of it. So we created Zumba virtual Facebook groups that people could join and learn how to teach virtually we created courses e-learning courses and we created Zumba virtual pro which would help them. The not only on their technical skills, but when you're speaking to a camera when you're dancing to a camera your movements have to be a little different you're how do you engage when you're not seeing the feedback when you're not seeing what the other person's expression is. How do you engage? How do you it's almost like acting classes, right? How do you end so we have a lot of fun doing it and we learned a lot from our instructors from their experiences.

3 (16m 30s):
And how do you take that to the next level?

1 (16m 33s):
You know, are you guys Guys strongly discouraged in your instructors from doing indoor classes. We're not we want nothing

3 (16m 40s):
more than for people to be back at the gyms and for people to be teaching classes together because Community is such a big deal people are a lot more accountable to other people than they are to themselves, unfortunately. And so if you know your buddies going to show up at your Zumba class or at your strong Nation class, you're more likely to go because there's someone waiting for you there. So we want the gyms to Reopen we want people to teach indoors again. We want to experiment with this hybrid model of teaching and doors and teaching virtually. We want people to be teaching Outdoors the more we can get people together the happier. We are

1 (17m 18s):
I want to ask you this important question because a lot of people as you know, Alberto who listen to our program are starting businesses and are also in marketing. How do you kind of Market what you do and successfully Reach people who may not know about About Zumba. How do you get the word out? What are some of your

3 (17m 37s):
strategies? Yeah, so the world is changed, right? Obviously the world of marketing has gone through an innovation period that has created lots of opportunities, but it's also very different these days. Currently. We obviously use social media. We have over 10 million people that follow us on social media. We spend hundreds of thousands of dollars advertising. The class even though we don't make any money from find the class, right because that money all goes to the instructors. We advertise it all the time and it's one of our biggest line items in our cost structure is advertising find the class.

3 (18m 17s):
So we create thousands of ads for people to come and find Zumba classes. And obviously the number one thing that drives people to Zumba is bring a friend is when somebody tells you hey, I'm taking this amazing class. I found this amazing. Instructor. Do you want to come with me? It's one of the best marketing tools we have so we help our instructors in our Gym Partner's encourage that as well. Yeah,

1 (18m 44s):
Alberto before we let you go. What is something that you have learned about yourself as a leader or something that this crisis has forced you to be or become that you want to take with you into the future as you continue to lead this company.

3 (18m 58s):
Wow, and I think that Focus has been so sharpened. Me where because we're all working from home. And because we are all trying to figure out what the next move is having clear crystal Focus for the organization and aligning everybody together has become so much more important and I think I've learned how to communicate better and because now you're communicating in this virtual world, you really need to have people understand what it is that That you want to get done and what it is. Where is that? You want to

1 (19m 37s):
go? Right Alberta pohlman co-founder Zumba. Thank you so much.

3 (19m 41s):
Thank you guy. It's great seeing you. Again.

1 (19m 43s):
That's an excerpt from a conversation with Alberto Perlman co-founder of Zumba. By the way, you should check out our episode on Zumba. We aired it back in January of 2017. It is hilarious and really interesting to see my full interview with Alberto. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live Use you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Tyra Lockhart Matt Adams, Gianna, Kappa, Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

1 (20m 26s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR. r