0 (0s):
Hey, everyone. Just a quick announcement before we start the show. So a lot of you may know how much I miss seeing all of you at the live in person shows that we do around the country turn in normal times. So I am really excited to finally announce our first, how I built this virtual event. It's happening next month with Jay Shetty. Jay is a bestselling author, former monk and wellness coach. And if you're searching for purpose, peace and clarity in your life, or you're struggling to find meaning and motivation at work, you will not want to miss this conversation. Please join us. It's happening on Thursday, March 11th, and anybody around the world can take part for more information and tickets, head to NPR presents.org.

0 (48s):
And I hope to see you there. Hey everyone. And welcome to how I built this. Resilience edition from NPR I'm guy Ross each week on Thursday, we invite entrepreneurs and other business leaders to come out of the show to talk about how they've been building Resilience into their businesses this past year. And you can join us each Thursday at 9:00 AM. Pacific 12 Eastern on the, how I built this Facebook, Twitter, or YouTube pages to hear the conversation and ask questions as well. This week, my conversation with Mark Gainey and Michael Horvath Co founders of the social media app. Strava Strava is a social fitness platform for athletes at every level.

0 (1m 32s):
And it's got more than 76 million users in nearly every country worldwide. If you've ever tried the app, you know, that it's a way for users to track activities like running and yoga and cycling all while connecting and sharing with other people in a huge virtual community Strava is focused on community engagement was inspired in part by how Mark and Michael first met his teammates on their college rowing team. For those who don't know about you, or Strava the two of you started a software company before Strava how did the two of you meet Mark we'll start with you.

1 (2m 9s):
Yeah, we, we have to go back to the last century. Guy for a couple of dinosaurs here. We, we met while in college, Michael is the senior of the two here I'll point that out. He was a class of 1988 and I was class a 90, a at Harvard. We met on the crew team and we met in the boat house a, which is pretty critical on two fronts. One was just the opportunity to develop that friendship. He was kind enough Michael was captain on the team at the time. And I joined and he, and some friends really took me under their wing and taught me how to row. I was a kid from Reno, Nevada, not a lot of rowing going on there, so learn how to row and the friendship developed. And frankly, then just that experience we had in that boat house became a really a catalyst for what we're talk about later with Strava.

0 (2m 49s):
Wow. And you both went on to a totally different careers. I mean, a Michael you went on to become an economics professor for a, I'd say

2 (3m 0s):
In a form of life. I, I was a struggling academic after graduating with my PhD, I could go East or I could go West I. I went to a school in the middle of the country because Mark was already, and in the Bay area, I decided that job at, at Stanford university was the one that I would take. And so moved out in 1994. And so for the people who remember what the early internet was like, it was a really difficult in some ways to sort of understand how we change our lives, but we knew it would and Mark was there. And we started to explore, what would we do with this thing called the internet? How would it affect us in our lives? And that, that was part of how we came up with the idea for Strava in those early days.

0 (3m 41s):
So how did the two of you, I mean, you, Mark the UN and worked in the early tech sector and Michael you were an academic. How did you, the two of you come together to form your first company? What, what's the story behind it? I mean, cause you left academia Michael so how did that, how did that happen?

2 (3m 57s):
Simply put, we were getting together in my office at Stanford and in part, because I had a fast internet connection and Mark had nothing or a dialogue back in those days. So we were exploring the space and we, we started to ask ourselves these questions, like, what would it, how would it change our life? What would we do with this? And I was in, I was in curious both from an academic perspective, but also, you know, as someone who just had some entrepreneurial inclinations and Mark was definitely in that, in that area, we went right away to what problems do we have in our own life? What are we missing? The internet might be able to solve in one of those was, as Mark mentioned, we met on the crew team and we have had, when we graduate from that environment, you lose the team.

2 (4m 39s):
It's difficult to keep rowing, unless you're going to dedicate a lot of your time to it. So we said, yeah, we kind of missed that feeling of being connected to a bunch of people around a round fitness. What if the internet could solve that problem for us? Could we create the virtual team if you will, with this new technology?

0 (4m 55s):
Yeah. Now it would take quite a while. I mean, 1994 early days. And Strava launch to, to think in 2009. So let's kind of fast forward to that. Mark, let's talk about the idea for, for, for launching Strava. How, how did that, I mean, you're talking about community, you're talking about fitness, Fitbits and stuff starts to come out around, then tell me about how Strava came about.

1 (5m 19s):
Yeah. Guy you hit the nail on the head. A couple of things happened. One was just a simple fact that the technology itself had advanced in a way that really opened up opportunities for us that didn't exist in the mid nineties. Things like wearable devices and Garmins on a bicycle handlebars and the advent of the smartphone, even, you know, the idea that we could start using phones for things other than talking to people. So that technology definitely benefited us. There were some social changes around technology. You know, we had the advent of Twitter and Facebook and things. And so all of a sudden this concept of people sharing their personal lives and sharing information, that was a very different from again, 1994 95. And so we saw those social trends and then there was a personal situation for Michael and I, you know, as you alluded to, we had been fortunate enough to have this other company that we actually built.

1 (6m 4s):
And the, in the late nineties, when the original Strava idea just wasn't ready for prime time. And so we had enjoyed what it was like to, to start something in, to build a team in and to be competitive out there in the business world. But we had left that company in the early two thousands after we took it public. And he and I were both sort of searching for that next thing. We realized that we had some life left in us and we wanted to up our sleeves and do something again, but something different, you know, had been enterprise software. The first time in, at this time, we really were enamored by this idea of, could we build a trusted consumer brand, a kind of company that we could in a leave a legacy with a, it could be around for decades to come. So that was the spur, the catalyst, and thankfully, a couple of other folks joining us and the way we went.

0 (6m 49s):
So for those watching, I think a lot of people probably used Strava in to how it works, but for people who don't know how it works, can you explain how, how it works? Sure.

2 (6m 57s):
Yeah. By joining the Strava community, you put your, the things you do to be active into the community, you upload your activity. If you will, where you can track runs, rides, hikes, walks over 30 different activity types. And by doing so, you connect with other people who share your joy of being active. And so we enable those connections and a lot of different ways as part of the experience. And when you do that, what happens is we learned is that you stay more active. People keep people active. And so it's that community by joining Strava you join that community and it helps you fulfill your goals of what you want for your fitness.

0 (7m 36s):
Yeah. We had the founders of SoulCycle and Zoomba and John Foley, a Peloton, others, and accountability is a word they use, which I want to come back to him in a moment. But before I do want to ask you about the business model Strava is free to use. There is a paid subscription side to it. It's a freemium model. A lot of brands uses Dropbox is a great example. We just had drew Huston on the show and I think he said something like three or 4% of Dropbox users actually pay for the product, but that's more than enough to make it into a profitable business. Tell me a little bit about your business model, cause they don't think you advertise on the app, right?

2 (8m 9s):
Yeah. We've focused on building things athletes love to use and are really glad to pay for and tell their friends about that's the aspect of our a subscription offering. And it's on a number of different parts of the experience that you get when you, when you subscribe that make it even better. And so by focusing on building things that athletes love that bill is a great business.

0 (8m 30s):
Yeah. Mark

1 (8m 32s):
Yeah, no. I think Michael hit the nail on the head. We really liked this idea of having just one customer that we can focus on. And that is the athlete for us. If you sweat, you're an athlete, it doesn't matter what pace you run. It doesn't matter how hard you go to, if you're going out and walking the dog on a Sunday afternoon to put it on Strava, that's, it's fantastic for them in and for us. And so that's the idea is to focus on that athlete. We love our free members. They are great content and activities and, and being part of the community. But our focus is to convince them that there's something here worth paying for and investing in and together. We're going to build those over the longterm.

0 (9m 5s):
NPR is a great example is public radio is a great example because we offer all of our content for free and we hope that people will voluntarily contribute to the stations. And I think almost 10% of public radio listeners do they voluntarily contribute to their station, but it's a social contract. It's like, we kind of hope most of you will in that model works. I know you can't talk about because you're privately held and you don't talk about financials and so on and so forth, but can you give us a sense of whether the business model works? I mean, I mean, can you talk about whether you're you're profitable?

1 (9m 36s):
Yeah, you're right. But as a, as a privately held company, it's not something that we share. What we can tell you is that when we focused on things that athletes love, it really does make for our a strong businesses. And so we have, we have a starting point of Mark mentioned is like the customer is the person who wakes up every day wanting to be active and we want to help them. We want to bring joy to their lives in the movement that they do. That is the basis of this twelve-year-old old company. We started with a team of six of us, a with an idea that it didn't have to be big and it had to be great. It had to make something meaningful impact in people's lives. And we're here 12 years later and, and growing and, and thriving, it's been a fun journey.

1 (10m 17s):
And we're really looking forward to the next 12 plus years.

0 (10m 21s):
A lot of folks watching are early stage entrepreneurs, small business owners, and they look at people like you for advice. So here's a question that I'd love to, to hear your answer on you have investors you've raised tens of millions of dollars and those investors at some 0.1 a return on their investment. So you have resisted advertising on the platform, but you've got tens of millions of eyeballs on your app. I mean, you've got a lot of people who, who use it, how do you resist the pressure to run ads? Because that, that would be an easy way to, to clear some cash.

1 (10m 57s):
It's a, we watched social dilemma recently. Guy and, and you know, this notion of, if you're not buying the product, you are the product. And I really, we believe deeply in that thesis, that Strava where we're convinced that there is a capacity within the us fit community to continue to support Strava and grow this business in a way that our investors are excited about it's, we've not felt that pressure from the outside. Do we believe that there's opportunities for diversifying the kinds of services we offer over the next, you know, again, 10, 20 years, of course, but we really are stuck on this principle that you need to understand who your customer is and stay focused there only the ad that you also get to pick your investors. So for entrepreneurs out there is, is really important to align what you see as the vision for your company, with who you're bringing in to help you grow it.

1 (11m 43s):
And we picked our investors really carefully on that regard.

0 (11m 46s):
Let me ask you a question about privacy. Okay. I'm one of these Greek people who has like 20 burner email accounts. And I use that pretty much everything I sign up with, even though I know that doesn't matter because my iPhone knows who I am, but you know, I've got this, this ring here that tracks my sleep. So they know me. It does concern me cause I, I really am worried about privacy. I know you guys had a feature called fly by that. You, you now allow people to shut it down and basically allowed you to, you know, when you are passing by somebody, you could see their running route. And how do you deal with this question of privacy? Because people are becoming increasingly aware of how important it is to maintain privacy.

0 (12m 26s):
So cause you, I mean for better or worse, like there's a lot of information that is, you know, that that's on the app that is revealed on Strava

2 (12m 35s):
No, absolutely. You hit the nail on the head. It's a This is very important to us because it's very important to the athletes on Strava. So we take our athletes data and the privacy of that data very seriously. And we are working all the time on trying to make sure that we're providing the right set of tools and understanding of how to use Strava in the way that you want to. You can use it in a completely private mode. You can open it up to a larger circle and you can be completely out there, you know, in, in public. But the important thing is making sure you can educate people on how they want to set that level of privacy for them, for their needs.

2 (13m 16s):
And thinking ahead, so we've done a lot of things over the years and we're, we're never done. It's like, it's a constant, a constant pursuit of making sure that people understand and how to stay in that mode of feeling good about the information they are sharing. And we can go in with some things at a very specific things is like, how do you, how do you educate people on it and experienced that they may not have really understood yet when they first joined. So you have to continually remind them that these privacy settings or their, and, and think ahead. And that's why, for example, making flybys, something that you have to opt into was a really important to us. So that someone who joined, who may not even understand what that feature means, wouldn't inadvertently be sharing information that they didn't want to This

0 (14m 0s):
Past a year. A lot of people have found routines because they're not traveling and their working from home and a lot more people have taken up fitness routines for people who haven't had. How do you get people to get motivated? Mark what, what are you suggest? Wow,

1 (14m 21s):
I go to, to, to basic pencil. One is I tell my own story, which is a, it's not, this is not about being fitter or faster or stronger. This is just simply an acknowledgement that when I find even 20 or 30 minutes a day to go to some form of exercise, and again, it can be the walk around the block. I just found that I'm a better person. Guy, I'm a, I'm a better partner. I'm a better coworker. I'm a better parent. And it's just a fundamental principle. And it's been proven by science and everything else. But anecdotally, I need share that. The second thing I'd say is to be candid, there's enough people. Who've decided that fitness to be a part of our life, but that's, we're really there to help them stay motivated because we believe that not only is it about accountability, but if we want to get other people off the couch, they need to be inspired.

1 (15m 9s):
And so we know the community we're supporting, that's figured this out there are going in, inspired the rest of the world. We could tell you some amazing stories of creativity and innovation from our athletes. This this past year during the pandemic people running marathons on their balcony, you know, doing what we call EverString, where you basically go to the equivalent of climbing 29,000 feet in their backyard on a, on a little Hill, right? It's a, so for us, if we can support those folks there telling the story and Strava doesn't have to do it, but I think it really comes back to that, that concept of inspiration and, and personal anecdote like here. Here's why this is valuable.

0 (15m 44s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. Most of my conversation with Mark Gainey and Michael Horvath and How uncertainty and isolation brought more users together on Strava in 2020, stayed with us. I'm Guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR

3 (16m 1s):
Yeah.

0 (16m 6s):
Support for this podcast. And the following message. Come from Upwork, the world's largest remote talent platform, devs designers, writers, strategists, you name it, find, hire, and pay all in one place. Need to find coders outside your area, code an SEO specialist for six weeks or a UI designer through December pro's available short or long-term and their proven rated and reviewed. When you need in demand talent on demand. Upwork is How learn more@upwork.com and one more thing. The New York times bestselling book, how I built this is now available.

0 (16m 50s):
It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas, inspiration, wisdom, and encouragement, to have the courage, to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with tons of stories. You haven't heard about how some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know, and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this. The book is available wherever you buy your books. Hey, welcome back to how I built this Resilience addition. And my guests are Marc Gainey and Michael Horvath Co founders of the social media app. Strava near the end of 2019. Strava went through a very public layoff and then a few months later, the pandemic shut down their Bay area office.

0 (17m 36s):
The co-founders were obviously worried but much to their surprise. Strava saw incredible growth in 2020, as people looked for more ways to find community.

3 (17m 48s):
The initial reaction was one of

2 (17m 50s):
How will we get through this it's it's public knowledge that we had had had to reduce the number of people in the company. We had to do a layoff a few months before. So we had been through already a, a trauma for the company. It was really difficult for everybody involved. And so on the heels of that, a few months later, we're going into this unknown of pandemic are focused in the beginning, was really, we need to make sure that our people are okay, all the other considerations that they have to come after that. And that was where we focused initially. So in some sense, you have a single purpose. You do that. You do that as best as you can, and together we, we made it work

0 (18m 26s):
And you saw like geometric growth, like, I mean, just insane growth over the past year, right? Like growth that you, I guess, sounds like you didn't anticipate initially.

2 (18m 37s):
Yeah, that's right. Looking back now at the data, you can even see the initial signs of it in January and February. And we were not sure what was causing it. We didn't sort of think too carefully, but when a, when we knew that it was because of people's need to get through this moment in time in the world's history with movement and connection, we leaned into that. It took a lot of work to even be able to handle the, the increased load. We went from adding about a million new athletes to the platform every month to at some 0.3 million a month. And it settled down to about 2 million a month now. So where we overnight kind of had to go to a different mode of operating though, it's software it's you still have a lot of hardware somewhere that's running all of this and scaling all that up and making sure that it wouldn't all fall down and crumble under the, under the increased load.

2 (19m 33s):
We have some very, very talented people in our team that have, have worked day and night to make that possible and really appreciate all the work that they did.

0 (19m 42s):
A lot of companies have taken big swings for the fences this past year, because they've had to, at a necessity they've had to be radical. Are there any radical things that you've done this past year that maybe would have been more challenging or more bureaucratic to, to try and previous years?

1 (19m 60s):
Well, I can think of to the one predated the pandemic, and then we faced an interesting sort of question as to whether or not it was appropriate. And that was a, some pay wall moves. We did some in essence, some pricing changes Guy and it was, it goes back to what Michael alluded to, you know, we'd gone through rough passed in 2019, and we needed to stabilize the business. And we were really thoughtful around, wait a second, if we're going to dedicate to our athletes and to the subscription business, then let's be transparent, but let's do it in a way we believe is scalable long-term. And so in the midst of the pandemic, we shifted the paywall. We, we added 70 new features throughout 2020, but it was not without trepidation because here we are not just in the middle of the illness, in a pandemic, there's an economic downfall that is taking place and being very sensitive to, to our own and what they're trying to do to go through.

1 (20m 49s):
So the other I would add is just the way in which we have to allow our team to sort of find their comfort zone, find their space, and whether that was physically, where did they need to be in the longer could we ask them to be in our offices in Denver and San Francisco, we need to let them go where they could find comfort and solace and whether that was family or, you know, just someplace safe and off the grid. Those are two that I can initially think of.

0 (21m 10s):
Well. And, and do you think, I mean, 70 features over the past year, I mean, do you think that, you know, some of those features would of been harder to introduce in a less volatile year in a sense of a more stable year?

2 (21m 25s):
Yeah. I can see it in both directions. One of the things we worked on very hard was on a way to explore the world around you with the whole bunch of functionality around routes and route planning and finding interesting places to go and be active. That's a really tough thing to launch into a world with that shutdown where you're, you may not be able to leave your apartment for very long and certainly shouldn't be far away from it. So we have to really pivot on that one and, and say, even if you're just exploring your own backyard, this can help you. And then on the other hand, I would say where the focus of the past year has been predominantly around our subscription offering what we're asking, you know, where, where are we, where are we have invested most heavily is, you know, on the athletes who are investing in us, I'd say that that part in any other time might be more difficult to do when right now people are paying a lot of attention to being active.

2 (22m 21s):
And so this is really looks like a great investment. You're investing in yourself when you subscribe to Strava

0 (22m 27s):
Seeing a correlation between how people were exercising and how their either geographic area or the country was affected by COVID like, for example, there were times in Italy where you couldn't even run outside, you know? And then the epicenter was the UK for a while. Then it was New York and then it was LA and it's moved around. Has that correlated to how people are, are, are exercising, outdoors.

2 (22m 51s):
Yeah. So, and, and indoors, I think we see a shift to indoor activity, a lot of different ways you can practice a workout, even if you're not outdoors, saw that in countries that went through extreme lockdowns, like the ones you're talking about. And then when it was removed, you see people freed and they go outdoors and they, they run further. The patterns that were, were very clear. What I think the data can speak too, is that you find new ways as, as your life patterns get disrupted by a pandemic, you find new ways to cope through activity.

0 (23m 25s):
I know a big part of Strava is community it's community building. It's getting people, you know, connecting with other people who use it and getting people to hold you accountable and you holding other people accountable and showing up, right? How do you encourage that? Right. Like every day I wake up and I exercise from a six to seven, but I can only do it because I have, who holds me accountable in the morning on a video every day. And I have to be there because that person is going to show up on my screen. Right. How do you enable that accountability through the app? And can you make it even more of a central feature of Strava?

2 (24m 2s):
Oh yeah. We're, we're investing in exactly that right now, this is where we see the needs that people have in this present moment with pandemic as well. What people are lacking is that sense of connection with others. So we're building specifically around things that how you can use Strava together with the people that will help you stay accountable to your goals and help you use to get more out of the time you, you spend being active. So that's coming in and in the months ahead, we're really excited about that.

0 (24m 32s):
Can you tell us about it? We get a lot of questions about it from Madison Harris and Brian for the people I say, well, what are you going to do to bring people together? Tell us about it. Can you give us a taste of what you're going to do with them?

2 (24m 43s):
Say, you may have participated on Strava challenges before, which are kind of global, everybody just trying to accomplish a goal. We're building a capability for you to challenge a few of your friends. And it could be collaborate with a few hundred friends to accomplish a goal together, but that we can bring this so that you can decide what you want, what you find would be motivating for you and your friends that should be coming before the mid middle part.

0 (25m 8s):
Yeah. I love that idea of, of, of, of a collaborative challenge. That's so cool. Right? That's what you guys did in Cru. You all have to work together to make that, that boat win.

1 (25m 17s):
That's correct. How can you think about teamwork elements here? Guy if you're not familiar with our challenge platform, I mean, it's a really amazing experience. You know, I think last may was the first time we had over a million people to sign up for our 5k and it's one thing to sign up, but then to be able to sort of connect with those individuals throughout that month in and try to go for it. That's that's what has us inspired to just continue to think about ways in which we, we bring that to smaller groups and individuals and, and allow them to not always compete with each other, but sometimes support each other in a, in a shared goal

0 (25m 47s):
With, you know, I mean, you guys started in 2009, there's been an explosion in fitness apps and programs, and there's a lot of competition out there. There's a lot of options there's, you know, fit on and they have other devices and Garmin and other competitors. Obviously you have a huge, critical mass, but how do you, how do you maintain your competitive edge when there's so many options out there?

2 (26m 11s):
We designed Strava to be the social platform at the center of all of that. So many of those experiences and devices, their partners, they help athletes get their activities into Strava. So they can be part of the community and interact with their friends around those activities. That's the way we intend to continue to build Strava is, as we say, it's the model where like, if we're going to be the Hooper vacuum for all activities in the world, we want to be the record of the world's activities. So we want to build it so that others can plug into it. And we have an open API that allows to develop an experience perhaps is around a sport that we don't, we don't do particularly the well inside of our app, or they can plug into, through our API to get the data from the athletes into Strava.

2 (26m 54s):
And then it's part of that community experience inside Strava likewise with devices, hardware, you know, hardware like a that you see on a trainers like anything, if you're on a Swift, you can connect your Strava counts. If you're on Peloton, you can connect your account to Strava. And that brings that experience into a Strava. So it can be a part of, of what you get out of, out of the community of other people who love to be active.

0 (27m 19s):
I want to ask you about given that Strava is such an important cultural force in the world of running particularly running. I want to ask you about race running and race back in may. Obviously we, we all, you know, heard the story of a mod Arbery and his killing when he was going for a run. And a lot of, a lot of media attention was focused on running as, you know, a predominantly scene as a white or, or an activity that excludes black runners or that it's literally dangerous. There was a whole conversation about running while black. I mean, given your cultural importance in the world of running, what role can you play in changing that in, in working to, to make running perceived as a, as an inclusive and safe activity for everybody?

2 (28m 10s):
Yeah, I'm really glad you asked this question. Guy it's a, This this last year. Not only did the world face pandemic, but we have to face also the inequity and injustice in the world. And it's everywhere. A mods killing definitely affected the world of sport and the world of running. And we aren't leaders in that space before we can be that platform, which we, I believe we can one day be to give people voice, to raise awareness of the injustice and inequity in the world. We've got to work on, on our inside Strava at first. And so we, we made a commitment to be an anti-racist company after the murder of George Floyd in may, and you can make a commitment, but then honoring that commitment takes real work.

2 (28m 59s):
And we're engaged in that now, thankfully, there are a lot of people who are on the outside of Strava, who are helping us and connecting with us. People like Alison Desir, who was the first to raise awareness of Ahmad's killing and what that really indicated about the world of running, how different the experience was for people of color than for white people. So we are definitely a work in progress. We spend a lot of our time right now, really just focusing on how do we strengthen inside so that we can be great at being that platform one day for giving voice, to, to groups that are going to make a real change in the world. And I think we are not the only company doing this. There's lots of, lots of companies that realized they have a role to play.

2 (29m 43s):
What started in the summer in the, in the middle of 2020 absolutely needs to continue until the decades ahead. We have to keep, keep on it. And we will.

0 (29m 53s):
Where are you guys go with one last question for both of you in practical terms, how has this past year and all that you've been through as a business and as partners and as leaders, how has that helped you become a better leader? Mark first to you?

1 (30m 10s):
You know, a guy I think it is done is it's, it's taught me to slow down. I think for me, I'm trying to figure out how to do that more effectively to slow down, to appreciate things in ways that I hadn't before that Michael's heard me for years talk about the three PS it's, it's something that he and I created way back in the late nineties and a three-piece where a patient's persistence, but also perspective. And I think these last nine, 10 months, that's, there's a lot of silver linings to what's happened here. Being able to slow down time. The I keep joking. I never was a Walker. I, I, if I went out with my, with my two feet somewhere, I was either running or biking or skiing, but I wasn't gonna walk, but just to walk now, something as simple as that and realizing the value of, of that at that pace, both physically, but also sort of mentally and for everybody else around us,

2 (31m 0s):
Michael, it's a corollary to what Mark just said, which is do less better. We are deceived with all sorts of places where we need to pay attention and get involved. And we can't spread ourselves thin and expect to accomplish things that we're going to be proud of. So make some tough choices to, to prioritize the, the best things you have to say no to some really great things and doing less better is what I have taken away from the last year.

0 (31m 30s):
That's an excerpt from my live conversation with Mark Gainey and Michael Horvath Co founders of the social media app. Strava if you want to see the full interview or any of our past live interviews, you can find them on the, how I built this Facebook page or at youtube.com/ NPR. And if you want to join our conversation live and maybe even ask questions, they happen every Thursday at nine Pacific new knee stern. If you want to find out more about the, how I built this Resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents.org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with help from Paris Safari, JC Howard, Bruce Grant Elmanian Giana Kappa Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney, Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers.

0 (32m 17s):
Our intern is Janet oo, John Lee. Thanks for listening. Stay safe. And I'll see you in a few days. I'm Guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR.