2 (0s):
Hey everyone. So I have a request if you value this show if you value the stories the lessons the wisdom and inspiration we bring to you if you think of me as your friend, which I am because even though millions of you are listening. I'm actually talking just to you right now. I need you to be there for me as well. And you can do that by supporting what I do and buying my book how I built this it is just out now and available everywhere and it It doesn't cost more than a few cups of coffee. And it's filled with wisdom and stories and ideas that will have you feeling inspired and fired up to Take On The World.

2 (41s):
So please if you love this show and what we do for you do us one back and pick up how I built this wherever books are sold. Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes. We talked with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're dealing with this very challenging moment in human history and the creative ways. They're trying to figure it out. So back in 2016. I got a chance to talk with Mark Cuban. He's one of the sharks on Shark Tank. Of course, he's also the owner of the Dallas Mavericks and it was a really open and honest conversation and you Check it out in our feet if you haven't heard it.

2 (1m 22s):
And so recently I was really excited to talk with sent Marshall who Mark brought on a couple years ago as the CEO of the Mavericks sent is actually the first African-American woman to be the CEO of any NBA team. Now, this is only her second season with the Mavericks for first was in the 2018-19 season last year and when she got the call from our Cuban, she didn't even know who

4 (1m 47s):
he was that is kind of embarrassing. That I didn't know him

2 (1m 50s):
but oh, it's not totally it's cool. Actually, it's better that you didn't know where he

4 (1m 53s):
was now it is. I mean, I work for AT&T for 36 years then came to Dallas to do cultural transformation and HR work is something completely different for AT&T and after six years of that retired and then on February 21st, 2018. I started getting all these text messages. And actually I

1 (2m 12s):
thought it was one of my kids I have four kids. So I thought it was one of my kids looking for money. So I handed my husband to phone and said one of the kids need money there. One up the phone can't you handle it and that he came back and said I think you need to return this call. It's Mark Cuban. And so of course I asked them who was that and all that

4 (2m 28s):
and so when I when I went to see him he talked to me about a Sports Illustrated article that just came out and I was

1 (2m 36s):
very genuine about wanting a culture

2 (2m 38s):
transformation just to clarify. This is the article that came out about like 20 years of sexism and pretty devastating article about the culture at the Dallas Mavericks and Mark Cuban. He came to you saying we gotta begin to solve fix this problem.

4 (2m 54s):
And so I need your help. I

1 (2m 55s):
need your help. And so we talked for about almost an hour

4 (2m 58s):
and I still hadn't decided that I

1 (2m 59s):
was going to do it and then to women talk to me as I was leaving his office what

2 (3m 3s):
they say to you. They said like please we need you.

4 (3m 5s):
Yeah. Yeah. They said are you the person who Mark Cuban said is going to come in and save us I said, well, first of all, I do not have the power or ability if anybody but yeah, we are talking

1 (3m 15s):
about me coming in to help out and they said you have to come and they started telling Some things that were happening and I said, well, you know I go home and pray about it. And you know, maybe I'll come back tomorrow. And so I did go back the next day and I was there for about three hours in a conference room with people just coming in and out talking to me and Mark didn't even know I had come back but just met some

4 (3m 35s):
wonderful people who

1 (3m 36s):
needed leadership and that's what

4 (3m 38s):
Mark wanted. That's what he asked for. And so I said, yes

2 (3m 41s):
and synth from what I understand when you got there and this is I think this is pretty common in a lot of corporate environments and certainly maybe in the sports world. Old former I read they were like no women in leadership positions are very few and Leadership positions and actually wasn't incredibly diverse either and that was one of the first things that you wanted to

1 (3m 59s):
tackle had to had to and so I had a recipe. So the first thing I did was set out a vision and the vision just basically said the Dallas Mavericks was set the NBA standard for diversity and inclusion by 2019 meeting we had about what nine months to do that so that was the vision we set out because I know the business case for diversity. And you have to have a diverse group of people around the table. If you really want to be a successful as you can be and then I had one on one with all the employees and then made some leadership changes. And so now we have almost 50 percent women and Leadership and 47% people of color. And so whatever's diversity matters it matters.

2 (4m 37s):
So your goal was to set the NBA standard for diversity inclusion. And are you now the most diverse and inclusive leadership team and for an NBA organization?

4 (4m 47s):
I know we're somewhere at the top We

1 (4m 49s):
actually ended up getting the NBA's diversity and inclusion award in January for all of the work that we have done. So that was

4 (4m 58s):
that was pretty special for

1 (4m 59s):
us because we have a lot of people working very hard. I'm not just diversity because you know, there is a difference diversity is about the mix. It's about race gender ethnicity all of that. But

4 (5m 11s):
inclusion is about the time the sense of belonging it's

1 (5m 14s):
about you know, what do you do with that mix of people and so we've been very focused on

4 (5m 19s):
All of that including Equity including Equity

1 (5m 21s):
fairness and all that and

4 (5m 23s):
so I haven't recognized by

1 (5m 24s):
the NBA was big for us. I mean,

4 (5m 26s):
obviously we still have a lot of work to do will always have a lot of work to do but I

1 (5m 30s):
think we've made some progress it definitely looks different and feels different from watching

4 (5m 34s):
2018 according to what the folks are telling well,

2 (5m 38s):
but it's interesting because you had no experience in the Sports World you were you worked for AT&T and you worked in the corporate world and they sought you out and that it sounds like you basically came in and said I'll do this job, but I've got to make some big changes here and it sounds like you were supported in that endeavor.

4 (5m 54s):
Oh, I was I was definitely supported by Mark. I mean

1 (5m 57s):
he wanted to see some changes. He did give me free reign to make the leadership changes that needed to be made some people didn't think that was going to happen and he said no do what you need to do. I mean, obviously we talked about the plan before I execute it on it because I put together a 100-day plan and it was a 100-day plan that had four main pieces to it. The first piece was to model. Power is complete an investigation and

4 (6m 22s):
to really let people know that we have zero tolerance

2 (6m 24s):
for sexism for racism

4 (6m 27s):
sexual harassment misconduct and false allegations. I mean all of it. We're just not going to tolerate it. And so that means that if some people need to go then they need to go the second piece was to develop a mass woman's agenda empowering women elevating women and then we laid out a whole culture transformation agenda what needs to happen

1 (6m 46s):
around here. What's our diversity and inclusion? Strategy, how are we going to address culture and then just basic operational effectiveness looking at gender pay Equity looking at Market based compensation performance reviews is the basic things. You need to run a business, which is what I have been used to for 36 years

2 (7m 3s):
since what's been the hardest part about making cultural changes at the organization. I mean, I imagine that you probably had times faced resistance or you know, maybe people didn't fully understand what was happening or what you were trying to achieve. We're there were there. Commandant.

4 (7m 20s):
I think the hardest part is to try to institutionalize a new culture while you're purging the old clothes

1 (7m 29s):
because keep in mind when I got there there were you know, there are people there who have been involved in some of them favorable activity. And so I mean, I had one situation where somebody actually told their whole team don't respond to her don't do anything. She's asking to be done because she won't be here in 90 days. Wow, that's unfortunate because then you have a whole a group of people who are also impacted who want to have the positive changes, but their leaders are saying don't get involved, but we address that we address that but you have to just keep

4 (7m 59s):
going I had one on ones with every

1 (8m 2s):
single employee

4 (8m 3s):
in the organization. I start out with the same question. I said give me your whole life story. And so most of the time they would start off with. Oh, this is my fifth season at the Mavs or this is my 10th season at the Mavs and I said, okay back up. Were you born here? I want to know your whole life story. So then I back up because usually they were

1 (8m 21s):
surprised that I actually wanted to know their whole life story.

4 (8m 23s):
Then they would give it to me and then at the very end after we have all of our conversation. The last question I would

1 (8m 28s):
ask is I said, what do you see yourself five

4 (8m 31s):
years from now and what was very clear to me guy and I

1 (8m 34s):
mean one night. I just started crying because I realized I had all these people who set out to have a career in sports not just jobs, but a career and all of a sudden I'm These people and so my job is to make sure they get to have the careers in sports that they wanted to have just like the career in Communications that I was able to have. And so I just I asked the two women who are brought in

4 (8m 60s):
with me. I told him my night I said, you know what

1 (9m 3s):
I need to know if you're all in because I'm all in with these people. I love these people and so

4 (9m 9s):
after that we started making some leadership

1 (9m 10s):
changes and did what

4 (9m 12s):
we needed to do, but it was all based on that hundred a plan and every

1 (9m 15s):
time we felt like We checked something big out who would have a big kind of

4 (9m 19s):
ceremony a huddle if you will and

1 (9m 23s):
we check it off as an organization. We have to all agree that this particular item have been checked off. And so I remember one time I was getting ready to check out as compensation and everybody started looking kind of weird and I thought what's going on around here and I whispered over to my head of human resources and said why is everybody wasn't kind of strange? She said we haven't heard it yet. I said, oh it's like they were called me on it. Like no, we're not checking this

4 (9m 45s):
off because it's not And so also oops I said, okay guys I get this is premature. I guess it's premature to everybody. And so then they gave the feedback and give

1 (9m 55s):
everybody, you know the information and then we came back and have a ceremony and checked it off and on the very last day. We checked it off. We left our building. We walked back in. I'm covered all of our values our new mission statement all that had a little ceremony where everybody dip their hands and paint and had this wall where we just basically said we're all

2 (10m 14s):
in that is so cool. There's something you You said there and I want anybody watching or listening to this right? Now? This is so important and it's a reason why how I built this our show resonates and connects with so many people you asked people to tell you their story and that's something that not enough of us do with our work colleagues, even with people we've known for decades. We don't always know their story when you know, someone's story. There's no way not to develop empathy. There's no way not to you you learn about Their struggles and their obstacles and challenges they went through it changes your perspective about somebody when you know their story

1 (10m 54s):
if they danced and we all have a story and you said I mean it's about perspectives. We all bring different angles to things we bring different perspectives. I mean, I don't know if you've

4 (11m 4s):
ever seen the diagram where

1 (11m 5s):
it's depending on what side you're standing on either you see a 6 when you're looking down on my are you see an I

4 (11m 11s):
read the caption underneath says it's not that I'm wrong and it's not that you're right. You just haven't seen life. From my side and so we need to know all those perspectives and that's why we need to know people's stories. I always say one of our values is authenticity. So I value spelled craps. So let's character respect authenticity fairness teamwork and safety both

1 (11m 33s):
physical and emotional safety and so

4 (11m 35s):
on the authenticity piece I hashtag is do you I want the person who gets up out of bed in the morning all the issues. They have the backgrounds. They have the stories. They have the perspectives they That's what I want to walk into our workplace every day. You don't have to leave yourself at home. You don't have to leave your story at home. You don't have to park it in the parking lot. That's what makes us a great place to work to have all of those backgrounds and

1 (12m 1s):
cultures and perspectives

4 (12m 3s):
working and I've been in the situation where I was asked not to be who I am. And so I've lived those days and I don't like that. I don't like that the person who gets about a bed in

1 (12m 13s):
the morning needs to be the person who walks into the building. And we as Leaders need to meet people where they are

2 (12m 20s):
when we come back in just a moment more for my conversation with sent Marshall and how NBA team owners often have values that don't align with their players stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor access and opportunity a podcast from Morgan Stanley. Join Morgan Stanley's vice-chairman Carla Harris a 30-year Wall Street veteran as she introduces listeners to the dynamic investors entrepreneurs policymakers and others who are working to close the funding gap for entrepreneurs of color.

2 (13m 2s):
Listen And subscribe to access and opportunity with Carla Harris on Apple podcast Spotify or wherever you get your podcasts. And just one more thing the how I built this book is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with a ton of stories. You haven't heard and have some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books and please if you support what I do on the show, you can show that support by picking up how I built this the book and thanks.

2 (13m 51s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So the NBA is basically a case study on professional sports leagues that depend on athletes of color and yet so many team owners often hold values that are at odds with the players values and sometimes even their fans. So when I spoke to Dallas Mavericks CEO sent Marshall, I asked her about how players might hold owners accountable. Do you think we're in at a time and a place now where players will start to or will be able to hold owners more accountable for their public positions and Views.

1 (14m 28s):
Here's what I'll say to that and obviously I can talk about the Mavs I can talk about what's happened with the NBA. I were playing in the bubble with a court that says black lives matter. Okay, because our players decided that they wanted to be able to speak out. They're not in their home market. So they're not able to do some of the things that Normally do we have this kind of a situation like we've been in post your exploit public lynching and so for the players to say we want to take a stand we want to have something on our jerseys we want to speak out on this and

4 (15m 2s):
they're all mad they're able to do that, but it's not just the players. I mean, it's all of us. I mean at the Mavs we launched something called Maps take action. It's our own plan to address racial inequities promote social

1 (15m 14s):
change. I look at some of the

4 (15m 16s):
injustices. And what I always say is we don't just work here. We don't just play here. We live here too. And the things that are important to our communities are important to us. Fortunately we have a

1 (15m 28s):
terrific owner who understands what's happening in the country who understands the community

4 (15m 33s):
and I know it's you know, you have a lot of situations where people just have differences and that's okay. It's okay to have differences. We've had some season ticket holders who have

1 (15m 43s):
called and asked for a refund because of our And some some issues

4 (15m 48s):
and I like to talk to them. I like to have a conversation because this is about we are courageous conversation on June 9th. We said we are normal conveners. We unify people as a basketball team. We bring people out. So we're going to have the socially distant courageous conversation. We're going to talk about the reactions to the drawers Floyd situation. We're going to talk about biases and stereotypes and all that. Our theme was listen

1 (16m 11s):
learn unite because that's what it's about

4 (16m 14s):
listening to each other learning our stories. Learning what people are going through and then uniting around action plan to move this country forward because we still have some issues to address and some of these issues are 400 years old. And so I think we're all holding ourselves at each other

1 (16m 30s):
accountable. I know that's what we're trying to do here in Dallas and at the mass

2 (16m 33s):
a question from Rihanna da Tia through Facebook Rihanna asks, what's it like working with a vocal owner like Mark Cuban. He's probably the best-known owner and in basketball and one of them in professional sports and how much Control, does he have over organizational

4 (16m 48s):
decision-making? So I will tell you it's wonderful working for him.

1 (16m 52s):
He is I love the fact that he is vocal. He's bold. He's courageous because I'm all those things too. So I like having a boss like that and I'm blessed

4 (17m 2s):
but he's one of those boxes where he makes you feel like you're the only person in the room or the only person on the phone because you'll give you

1 (17m 10s):
100% of his attention. I love that as busy as he is

4 (17m 13s):
and I can run all kind of things by him. I do have the decision.

1 (17m 17s):
Making power on the business side. I'ma make my own Personnel moves. I make the decisions and at the end of the day,

4 (17m 23s):
you'll say sit as your call. I mean that's one of his favorite line scent is your call but he is involved. I mean

1 (17m 28s):
he's involved from the standpoint of being there as time

4 (17m 32s):
my coach and my mentor I'm learning the business of basketball Fiona, which is great and he claims that he's learning some things for

1 (17m 40s):
me about leading people and diversity and inclusion now that so I don't know.

2 (17m 45s):
I'm sure he's learned a number. Unbelievable amount from you. I'm sure it's been absolutely like revolutionary for him since I've on the business side. Can you kind of give us a sense of what it means to be the CEO of an NBA team, you know versus like an owner or general manager. Like what is what is the CEO of an NBA team? Do

4 (18m 6s):
I manage the business side of it? So ticket sales operations serving our

1 (18m 12s):
fans making sure that we have a full house in the arena when we play at home. Omar the marketing brand identity sponsorships. So the three of

4 (18m 22s):
us report to Mark Cuban, so I have the business side Rick Carlisle is our head coach and Donnie Nelson is the

1 (18m 28s):
general manager all the scouting and all of that so I don't Scout I don't coach I handle the

2 (18m 33s):
business side, but kind of walk us through the the business challenges here because I'm imagine that a huge part of a team's Revenue comes from fans appearing at the arena buying snacks buying spear. Buying merchandise and a lot of that's virtually all that's gone. So does television do television deals and and maybe a merch sales? Does that make up for the loss?

4 (18m 58s):
Well, not not not 100% So we are we're trying to be creative. We did some things in the bubble with our sponsors and the big thing was trying to figure out how to make sure that our sponsors are still visible. Yeah,

1 (19m 13s):
so we have some you know the

4 (19m 15s):
online signage on the court. Art, so it's a challenge online merchandising has increased we have to Pivot quickly. You know, we gave away a lot of math and

1 (19m 24s):
a lot of you know PPE

4 (19m 26s):
but we also started started selling something. So just really trying to figure out how do we meet the community's needs but also figure out a way to make some money in the process. So online Merchants really really gone up for us, but you're right. I mean we had eight home games that we missed at the end of the season, right? Cause all we shut down and so we had to Fortunately for us most of our fans didn't ask for a refund. Most of them said either carry it on give me a credit into next season and let's see what happens or will donate it to we were

1 (19m 59s):
doing a lot in the community. I mean we filmed it so we did a lot of the community and so they want to be a part of that because this Dallas region is amazing in terms of just being there for the community. And so a lot of people wanted

4 (20m 11s):
to partner with us on that so knock on wood. Yes, it is challenging financially,

1 (20m 15s):
but it could be much Much much much

2 (20m 17s):
worse. Yeah, this is a question from Med LMS Eerie document asks, what advice would you give to other minorities and women in the business environment about leading conversations around diversity and inclusion in a company, especially if we're not in

4 (20m 34s):
leadership roles depending on the size of the company. So if you have employee resource groups or Affinity groups,

1 (20m 40s):
usually those leaders of those groups will pull people together and pull the business together to have those conversations.

4 (20m 47s):
But even if you don't have them, I think somebody has to be bold enough to step up and to talk to their leaders if they're not doing it. I mean,

1 (20m 56s):
yeah, we have leaders who are but if they're not

4 (20m 57s):
doing it. Somebody has to say

1 (20m 60s):
we need to talk about this

4 (21m 2s):
and I played that role years ago. Somebody has

1 (21m 5s):
to step up and do it because there's no way we can have a double pain dimmick going on

4 (21m 9s):
and we truly have a double pendant. We've got covid-19 and then we've got the issue of social justice. So we've got to

1 (21m 16s):
Pentonville. Is going on in this country right now. Yeah,

4 (21m 18s):
and we need to be talking about both of them. I mean when the drawers for thing happened some of our first American man said

1 (21m 25s):
somebody constant we need to talk like today

4 (21m 28s):
and so we talked for three hours that Friday

1 (21m 30s):
night and then that Monday my leadership team called turned into a whole conversation around race that our

4 (21m 36s):
entire weekly huddled. If you have all these kind of touch points for a solid week, all of them were

1 (21m 43s):
around what was happening with social justice

4 (21m 46s):
just like previously We were talking about covid and so you sound respond, but it's because employers were saying here's the agenda item. Here's what I want to talk about. And so we responded to that and then that led

1 (21m 56s):
to a bit Community conversation. So you just

4 (21m 58s):
got to put it out there. Here's the agenda item and hopefully there are ways to do that is direct phone calls is through hotlines is through sending somebody an email leaders have to

1 (22m 8s):
respond to that especially when it's coming in math. When a lot of people are saying we're going to talk about this.

2 (22m 14s):
Yeah, you know sent the That part about this conversation for me is you're turning me into a Dallas Mavericks fan.

4 (22m 23s):
Oh my God, great team.

2 (22m 27s):
Oh my God. All right before I let you go. A lot of people are wondering whether professional sports going to be changed Forever. At least for the medium term, right? I mean fans might be scared to go back to Arenas and stadiums and some people are wondering whether they'll ever be a return to normal professional sports as they existed before, you know, March 20 20 What do you think? I mean, do you think that the NBA let's say there's a vaccine do you imagine that like in the fall of 2021? You know when the season starts again? It'll be back to

4 (22m 56s):
normal. I sure hope so. Oh my goodness, but I think a lot of that

1 (23m 0s):
has to do with just what's happening obviously in our country. And so we need the vaccine. We need to wear our masks. We need to wash our hands keep her

4 (23m 7s):
distance all that but I'm optimistic. I'm an optimistic person if you can't tell and so I think we will slowly work our way back, but I will tell you the NBA has we focus on

1 (23m 17s):
safety which is why we ended up in the bubble safety first. I mean safety first and

4 (23m 23s):
so what's his name safe. We'll be back in there. And so we're making plans. We hope we have a full Arena and may not start out fool. We don't know exactly when we're going to start but I'm optimistic. I'm optimistic. I see a day out there. We'll all get

1 (23m 38s):
back and we can't

2 (23m 39s):
wait. That's an excerpt for my conversation with sent Marshall CEO of the Dallas Mavericks the first African-American woman CEO of an NBA team to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org this episode was produced. Oost by JC Howard with help from Liz Metzger will Mitchell Bruce Grant Matt Adams L. Mannion Gianna cappadonna, John, Isabella, Julia Carney Diva Grant and Jeff Rogers are interned is Farah Safari.

2 (24m 23s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll be back in just a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR.