1 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience addition. This is where we've been talking with entrepreneurs about how to think creatively during this really disruptive moment. And one of the hardest-hit industries in recent months has been Fitness thousands of gyms and studios around the country are trying to figure out new and creative ways to serve their customers. That's also happening with barre3. It's a studio exercise program that blends ballet with Pilates and yoga the company has around a hundred and sixty Studios across The United States most of which are still closed Sadie Lincoln is the founder of barre3. We told her story on the podcast back in 2017, and we called her up this week to hear about how the company has been able to shift to a virtual platform.

1 (45s):
So say the first of all your family is okay. I know you're in Portland and your company is based in Portland. And I mean, I'm assuming you've been all your team's been tell it kind of teleworking and zoom calls and things like that. Yeah. Yeah almost every No Studio was closed for a long time. We have about

2 (1m 3s):
30% ish starting to slowly open. But other than that, we've been we've been on Zoom.

1 (1m 11s):
We did a whole week on the restaurant industry, which is kind of a canary in the coal mine because it was the first industry to really get hit hard and the fitness industry obviously also really hit hard as you know yesterday. I think it was yesterday 24 Hour Fitness filed for bankruptcy protection. They're going to shut down I think a hundred and thirty Of their locations over the next few years you actually work there for 11 years and left to launch bar 3 tell me about the situation with bar about 30% of your locations are open but 70% are still still shut. Imagine. This is not an easy moment for the company.

1 (1m 51s):
No, I'm so many levels. This is one of the most hard profound important

2 (1m 57s):
moments of our history of our three. And we're not alone. That's one Comfort. I suppose all business is going through this right now and it's surreal for me to hear about 24 Hour Fitness going bankrupt because when I was there our tagline was bigger better stronger and we are unstoppable. We were growing at a rapid speed and it's also interesting because we've really tested barre3 as really tested our like Crisis resistance. Muscles during this whole covid quarantine and we shut hundred percent of our Studios and within 24 hours.

2 (2m 39s):
We got on a call crying with our franchise Advisory Board and our leadership team and all of us just deeply saddened about and fearful of the unknown and within 24 hours we came out and we said, you know what we are not close. We're opening the virtual studio and we opened livestream classes in our living rooms. with babies and cops and dog slamming and you know let go as sort of the precious nature of our premium brand that way but so dedicated to staying connected with our community and luckily some of our Studios have remained amazingly 90% pre covid Revenue because of the Loyalty of their Community really having an emotional connection with them and knowing the owner personally on a personal basis, but I'm thankful and this moment that we've Franchise that we've grown in and powered model that way because I think our communities have really stepped up to support our owners and aren't owners have worked their tails off work so hard.

2 (3m 43s):
So I think Community is key overall just to be clear. We're at our studio business is probably around 55% pre covid just to be clear. I mean

1 (3m 54s):
your locations are these are franchise owned and operated. Do they have autonomy Obviously given the the restrictions in their states on how they want to proceed. Like if they're in a state where you know businesses can open can the franchise owner make that decision on her own. Yeah. Yeah every single owner. It's truly her business. We had were a hundred percent female that lead right now.

2 (4m 19s):
It's her business and legal or legally her choice and that's the empowered franchise model and at the same time what's been really powerful? Able to see as collective with them amongst all of our owners coming together regularly to share best practices and the latest knowledge that we're all gathering in our different geographies about how to be as safe and attentive as we possibly can while really innovating and creating a new way for people to work out at home all you know, kind of all in one.

1 (4m 55s):
Yeah. I'm interested in in this idea that you said black within days we Pivoted to a virtual model and you mentioned I mean barre3 is a premium brand. There's a you know, they're beautiful Studios for those who haven't been they you offer childcare at many of the locations. I think if not all the locations, it's a very kind of peaceful beautiful clean space. It sounds like going to a virtual model was a little bit there was a little bit of sort of uncertainty about whether you would be able to match the Premiumness that you offer but it sounds like you just said, you know what we're you know, we're in a crisis moment.

1 (5m 36s):
We got to do this. We just got to go. Well, yeah and not only our studio was a premium experience our online streaming workouts with our premium. We've been we have beautiful set production. We have trained

2 (5m 49s):
instructors who have who have trained for years to be in front of the camera and it's very different to teach a class to a camera than it is to a group of people very Different skill set needed and also a whole set of fear and insecurity as soon as you turn the camera on. There's just a whole nother level of like shut down that happens about really coming across real. So yeah, we had to let go of that beautiful production and and I remember distinctly the team just because we kind of asked ourselves. What are we afraid of like go try let's do this, you know and when we day Gave all of our owners and ourselves that permission to be messy to fail and then you know pick ourselves back up and ultimately Triumph.

2 (6m 41s):
That's probably been my favorite Silver Lining of this whole experience is to see that happen and to really acknowledge that we are an empowered company that way and you know, we've had this beautiful online streaming service and we have subscribers in 98 countries is a really strong and now it's You know significantly better because so many people are working out at home. They're subscribing to that. But what we learned is that our studio clients don't care like they don't really want that. They want their instructor that they know they want their owner that they have an emotional connection with and they don't care if she's in her house with dog hair on her yoga pants. Like actually I would venture to say like that better.

2 (7m 25s):
I think there's an intimacy that we've all felt through this experience that that's pulled us together in a really powerful way. Basically

1 (7m 35s):
you have had a premium streaming model where it's basically instructors doing it via Zoom or Instagram live or however, they're doing it. I mean, it sounds like you've seen a real spike in people kind of signing up for the virtual classes. Oh, yeah. I mean overnight it was so interesting watching like I started to watch The Today Show because home and the commercials even like Uber or major brands. Are acknowledging this era and

2 (8m 2s):
in those commercials they were usually featuring people working out at home. Like that was the main dialogue people taking care of themselves at home. There was a massive like campaign within days of quarantine about the power of working out at home which you know drove our online subscription business significantly, which thank goodness. We have you know, that's really helped us sustain and be strong right now and helped us. Us all move and be happy more it probably more importantly

1 (8m 34s):
I was talking to a friend of mine who's a fitness instructor and just kind of talking about what this means for the future. I mean is the future of Fitness virtual or kind of a hybrid virtual and in person. Well what I know is that humans crave

2 (8m 51s):
connection and being together. It's a basic human need and we know this this is data-based, right? Loneliness is taking us down. It is an illness. In fact loneliness is as much a predictor of our longevity a smokiness now, we need to come together and community and when you come together in a group with music and alignment and innocence, but this empowering physical experience that sites lonely. So I don't think the in-person experience is going away and the Digital model is here to stay. So many of us have learned that oh my gosh.

2 (9m 35s):
I don't need to drive across traffic, you know for a 45-minute class that takes me 45 minutes to get there. I can press play during nap time and get my workout in right here and not so that's really liberating. Right really needing people where they are and where they need to be and also some people don't feel comfortable being in public. I know online more introverted days, you know, I'd rather be literally and figuratively At home in my body and have more permission to make it my own and honor what's right for me in that moment. And I think we're we've all literally everybody in the world has learned that in the last two months.

1 (10m 14s):
I love that you're reminding us and watching that you are an introvert because you are also such a public face of barre3 and and anyone who knows bar and bar 3 know Sadie and and and have you also been leading exercise classes Fitness classes. Oh, yeah, I continue to I've done well, I did a bunch of livestream ones on Instagram. Honestly. Those are

2 (10m 36s):
my favorite classes I've ever taught ever

1 (10m 38s):
they were because I was so raw and real in

2 (10m 42s):
my living room with my son's who's 14 was the camera guy my my daughter and my dog where the like backup dancers, you know, Chris would jump in every once in a while. And you know, I just taught what was present for me in my heart. I didn't choreograph anything. I just was like Literally gave everybody the same experience I needed and there's this sense of like togetherness that felt so good for me and honestly being in my home as an introvert felt really good to ya and I just had our first class. We just opened Cedar Mill and we're testing out the mean Cedar Mill here in Portland, Oregon. It's our biggest studio and we have a garage door that opens and I had four people in class.

2 (11m 26s):
It felt like 2008 when I first opened I kept saying it over and over again. I really feel like I'm opening again for the first time with a whole lot of wisdom, but it really feels like the beginning again. It really is a new start for for me and all of us here at bar 3 is pretty amazing

1 (11m 47s):
when we come back in just a moment. We'll hear from Sadie about some of the changes coming to barre3 and how her approach to leadership has evolved in quarantine. Stay with us. I'm Gyros and you're listening to how I built this resilience. from NPR support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So if you haven't heard the episode we did on barre3 back in 2017.

1 (12m 30s):
It's well worth checking out back. Then Sadie told us the story of how she kind of had a personal crisis in 2008 that led her to launch bar 3. I mean it reminds me of the podcast episode that we did with you back in 2017. I remember you describing just like being mentally and physically just broken, you know, I think your you said something like Fitness is failing me you were you are a fitness instructor you're working. That you were working in marketing and and for 24-Hour Fitness and you and Chris left. You left the Bay Area you move to Oregon and you start it again. And I think the thing you talked about at the time was how that personal crisis for you actually Foster Innovation. That's really when you were all your engines of creativity were on fire.

1 (13m 13s):
I wonder if there's a parallel to this moment. I mean it do you sometimes feel that same kind of Creative Energy on your best days right now. 100% you just nailed it with strong clear constraints a clear problem combined with purpose

2 (13m 34s):
and I would say an empowered team Innovation happens creativity happens and when I started bar 3 and really grew into part 3 I would say when I grew in the bar 3 around maybe 2012 I realized. Oh my gosh, we are so conditioned to exercise because we are manipulated for a long long years and years and years of conditioning and manipulation around the fact that we should buy Fitness so that we can change our body change the shape of our body to fit into an ideal that's imagined in the future.

2 (14m 15s):
That's not us who is going to succeed in that model so guy I that's what's happening. Right now for me with the black lives matter movement. I'm going to just skip to the punchline that I do both and my optimism around I do believe we're going to innovate. I do believe we're going to change. I do believe that greatness will come out of this and we are in the dark right now. We are in the hard stuff. As similar to Reckoning with the I was clearly not enough and shame around my own body and not living up to the ideal. I got I'm going through a lot of those same feelings being very self

1 (14m 55s):
aware that I am a white woman in leadership with immense privilege and confronting my own might bias around that that has led to me unconsciously building a company of leaders who look a lot like me and realizing that Systemic racism is real and just even understanding that and that we have been conditioned for hundreds of years around systemic racism and that very much late Fitness. It's a practice and fitness to be empowered in our bodies and alive and honest in our bodies as they are. It is a practice to fight racism.

1 (15m 35s):
If hard work is the inside-out job you have to you know, look inside and see that and and have teachers around you just like in our Studios like you need a teacher you need a guide and then ultimately our philosophy as yeah, you need a guide but your you have your own agency the job your job is to be empowered from within and the listen to your body and to take shape and to move with purpose based on alignment of what you need. And that's very much how I feel as a leader right now. I need teachers. I need Equity diversity and inclusion. teachers around me I need I need to hear the hard conversations from the bipod Community hard real conversations and hold space for that so that I can learn and then take steps forward and all of us here at Par 3 can learn and take steps forward in a purposeful way to answer questions and really want roundabout way so many parallels to 2008 for me and that's what I mean by we're going to reboot with a whole

2 (16m 31s):
lot of new wisdom and purpose and Just like the early days were probably going to mess up along the way and just pick ourselves up and try to be better

1 (16m 41s):
see I mean jumping on on that idea talking about racial Justice and Injustice. You've come to the last two high built the summit's and you facilitated a leadership circle with this is something that you do as a leader with your leadership team you bring them together and you guys have these very deep and meaningful and candid and raw conversations and this is part of your whole approach as a leader. Hey, are you able to do that in the same way now virtually and be have you started to convene those conversations around around race around your industry and race and around ideas that that you want to kind of bring out and uncomfortable conversations.

1 (17m 21s):
You want to have starting with your team.

2 (17m 23s):
Yes, and I'm

1 (17m 25s):
thankful that we have practiced this idea of circle in our Organization for 12 years

2 (17m 30s):
because we're primed in a way for this moment of holding space. And what I mean by that just to go back to Circle leadership the role of circle leadership me as a leader if I'm holding a circle. If I'm and you can just think about sitting around a dining room table or around a boardroom table or right now in Zoom. So yes, we're doing it through Zoom the jaw your job is to listen and to hold space. So everybody has seen and heard and not afraid to fail not afraid to speak their truth that build community it builds Trust. It builds debate it builds Innovation It ultimately bills culture because people on the team no no in real practice at their seen and they're heard everybody wants to be seen and heard and know they matter and that they're contributing and right from the quarantine moments.

2 (18m 24s):
That's what we did. We circled up on zoom and we allowed the tears to flow the anger the frustration and the certainty of duct connections. We made it. Concerted effort to meet on zoom in small groups large groups consistently Flash Forward to right now in this moment. Like I can't all of a sudden be an expert and have a plan right my job. As a leader right now is really learning and understanding and listening to the bipod community and specifically our clients who have reached out and team members. So I think it's the most important thing we can do right now is hold the conversation hold the space for all that.

1 (19m 6s):
I remember a man in your episode. You told a story about how you once like met Howard Schultz at an event and he was like, yeah email me and you actually did email him and then consulted with him just for leadership advice and he's widely considered to be really great leader of a business. It sounds to me like you're your leadership growth has sort of been on kind of like in this hyper drive mode like you've grown as a leader more in the last three months and maybe In previous five years thousand percent. The headline for me is it's not about me. It's not about me if people are upset right now directly at me.

1 (19m 49s):
I am here to hold that

2 (19m 50s):
space and to not take it personal because racism isn't about me right that's more important than my image protecting myself feeling sorry for myself and same with the team letting it go listening. I'm learning from our owners. I mean, I have a hundred and twenty invested owners who are teaching me right now actively teaching me right now how to innovate how to lead how to be resilient. It's always the job to be a student as a leader. Yeah, which I think

1 (20m 22s):
is a really important lesson because there's a perception that you know, the person at the top has all the answers but as you have made very clear that the person of the top needs help learning how to lead constantly

2 (20m 35s):
constantly. And how do how to

1 (20m 38s):
simultaneously learn be a student while making the executive decision while moving the business forward.

2 (20m 46s):
I mean we need to get out of this hole. We need to get we need to move. We need to create strategy and and plans and you know, so there is a little bit of switch Topic in their of this desire to to take more time and to really investigate and grow and learn and read every book I can get my hands on and An urgency to do it now. I'd have to check myself quite a bit on that front. And really I mean back to the black lives matter movement and everything that's happened in that space because that's just what's present for me right in this moment. Is this woman that I follow now? Andreea Renee, I believe her name is gave me a new term like ants really important performative activism.

2 (21m 30s):
But formative activism is rooted in a motivation to show up like on Instagram with To preserve or protect your image versus doing something that's super thoughtful and and based on truth and I've had to really really check myself on that front and ask myself before I post anything before I am I doing this because I feel like I have to or I should or they won't like me if I don't or am I doing this because it's something that's true and about our commitment to sustain change. And gross I think that's tricky for us. I think we all want to move to go right now without without doing the work force without being thoughtful first and we need to be thoughtful first.

2 (22m 14s):
Otherwise, this movement will not be sustainable with the headline will go away. The protest will go away all of us need to right now set our foundation and there's so many of us that are beginners at this. Unfortunately the vast majority of us white leaders and privilege are new at this. We need a set us on dacian of A practice so it's a sustainable so that we practice over the Long Haul how to look inside learn and then proceed with purpose so that we change the system we changed the model which is going to take time. It's going to take time and commitment City in

1 (22m 55s):
five years from now when you look back. What do you want? What do you want to take from this moment that will make what you do better and make your team better make your company better and make your value stronger. I'm going to quote Glenn and Doyle, we can do

2 (23m 9s):
hard things. We can do hard

1 (23m 11s):
things

2 (23m 13s):
just because it's

1 (23m 14s):
hard and can feel

2 (23m 15s):
scary. It doesn't mean we have to be frozen or Retreat back to comfort. We have an opportunity for greatness right now and I believe in bar through so much and I believe in so many companies right now and I feel this complete like Sisterhood and family of other businesses that are going through the exact same thing. We're going through it by 3 and I hope we can look back someday and say thank goodness. We went through that my favorite quote. I probably said this was podcast because I've always talked about this. But is this the sand in the Oyster that makes the Pearl this and the rub the discomfort within a shell a contained help space creates a gem and we are all really uncomfortable right now.

2 (23m 60s):
And I think that's good. We can do hard things and we can create a new future for my kids. It's for your kids for their grandkids and it's already happening in our classes. It's happening real time in our organization. I'll give you an example the dominant conversation on our social media right now under black lives matter is around access and we were we just had our studio design team meeting and we came in with greater urgency around lowering our cost so that with the lens of let's open our doors wider and do they need to be Precious do we need to have it be that expensive to build out or could we figure out a different way of doing things so that more people can come in and move with us.

2 (24m 48s):
That's cool to me. That's really exciting. You know, that feels like Innovation to me in a positive direction that will also help business and we all need the business to thrive. I hope you look back someday and we're at work. We think ourselves like wow, I'm so glad we went through that because we didn't go through that we wouldn't have been able to extend our reach like we have say

1 (25m 6s):
really can co-founder of barre3 say to you. Thank you so much. It's my sincere pleasure. That's an excerpt from my conversation with Sadie Lincoln the founder of barre3 to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilient series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice. Limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney, Gianna, Kappa, Dona Diva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.