1 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show the how I built this book is now a New York Times and Wall Street Journal bestseller. So thank you to all of you who ordered it and for your support of this show. If you haven't picked it up and you want to learn the secrets of how to develop an

3 (17s):
entrepreneurial mindset how I built this the book is for you. It's now available wherever books are

1 (24s):
sold and in most countries around the world or by visiting how I built this.com or Or guy Roz.com and thanks. Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience addition and these episodes as many of you know, we talk with entrepreneurs and changemakers about how their meeting today is challenges with new strategies and ideas. And today we're going to hear from varshney prakash the co-founder and executive director of Sunrise movement. It's an organization founded by young people to mobilize against climate change and to make the issue a top priority in the United States Garcinia launched sunrise in 17 along with just a handful of like-minded activists and it's since grown into one of the largest youth movements in the

3 (1m 14s):
country. We were just young people who were fed up with seeing politicians kicking the can down the road sweeping. What is the greatest threat facing Our Generation under the rug and refusing to deal with the reality of the crisis at hand and realized, you know at the young age of while I was 22 at the time. There weren't any adults in the room and we have to step up and take

1 (1m 40s):
action. How did you begin to organize? What would become Sunrise than this? Oh, it's you and a few friends, I guess and you're all committed to climate activism.

3 (1m 50s):
I mean, it was a number of us who are kind of getting activated in the Obama tastes, right? So I was working on a fossil fuel divestment campaign at UMass Amherst where I went to school others of us were working on the international climate negotiations or fighting against the Keystone XL pipeline. And or so on and so forth and I think we realized that the sort of culmination of the Obama years that much had been won. But at the same time the power of our movements were not keeping Pace with the rising Seas the worsening storms. Essentially. There was a crisis that was becoming a full-blown emergency and we didn't have a force that could contend with a disaster that would be upon us and so we actually went into a period of Buddy, we gathered about 12 young climate activists from around the country.

3 (2m 39s):
We went into a period of study for a year learning from other social movements the Civil Rights Movement lgbtq movements so far, as you know, Indian revolutionary movements to understand how to build mass movements and then we also realized as we were watching Bernie Sanders gained power, but also Donald Trump when we reckoned with the fact that the climate fights the climate crisis was not An urgent political issue by any means in this country that we had to combine our social movement organizing with political power. And so when we launched in the summer of 2017, we had our theory of change is largely around building a critical mass of enthusiastically supported public officials on the issue and building a large and active vocal disruptive base of young people and combining those two strategies for a long-term change.

1 (3m 33s):
So our Heaney is so because there's so many parallels right between what you do and what an entrepreneur does when they start a business and you are an entrepreneur in that sense and hope that I hope that's okay. It's an entrepreneurial venture and it's not just about businesses is also about things like this building a mass movement can't happen spontaneously. You can't just say to everybody. Hey, let's show up here at five o'clock. Like there is real hard work to organize people, right? Because once you organize people then you amplify an idea through thousands tens of thousands hundreds of thousands of voices.

1 (4m 13s):
Yes. How do you begin to organize people from one? Cell one small group? Mm.

3 (4m 20s):
Yeah. I mean, I will say the beginning days of Sunrise. We're not nearly as pretty as the actions that Pelosi's office or whatever else that people might know us from we had literally six of us or eight of us at the beginning. It was all over the country. So some of us were based In Kentucky some in Michigan some in California all over and the first thing that we ever did as Sunrise was we took 15 of our friends and we canvassed we went and talked to like over a thousand people at the people's climate March in April of 2017. Two months later. We brought together 20 of the top leaders that we had worked with in the climate movement up until that point to Pennsylvania to Philly where we train them in the basic sort of theory of Change the strategy the story that encompasses Sunrise movement and issued a call to action like we want you to go back to the communities that you came from and start a local chapter in Sunrise and start pushing your politicians to get off of fossil fuel money to put forward climate plans that are commensurate with what the science is mandating and that kind of grew and expanded and we did trainings.

3 (5m 33s):
I remember like sleeping on the floors of of of just people I barely knew in Colorado or you know going out there and doing some trainings that like three people showed up to in the beginning days because no one knew who we were or what we were up to but slowly and slowly we build chapters across the country, but I think everything came to a head when we did this quite dramatic direct action at Nancy Pelosi's office about a week after Democrats took back control of Congress in 2018 and said, you know Our Generation just helped you get back into office now, we need you to take action and have our backs by backing the green New Deal and by mandating that any Democrat that wants to claim the mantle of leadership in this party swears off of oil and gas money and I think because that moment people weren't used to seeing people issue challenges to Democrats people weren't used to seeing youth movements taking action and because there was just a real moment.

3 (6m 35s):
Moment around the climate disasters that were taking place during that time at the ipcc report that had just come out and this new leader in Congress. Alexandra Ocasio Cortez who joined us at that action. I think it created this moment of the Whirlwind just in six months following that action and all of the action that took place afterwards. We went from having just 20 chapters to having over 400 in six

1 (6m 59s):
months. So, I mean, it's an important lesson, which is that had you tried to kind of grow the movement simply By just reaching out to other activists. It might have been a slower totally but by doing something dramatic going to Nancy Pelosi's office sitting in there. You got a lot of media attention and that essentially enabled you to attract enough attention. Where a lot of other young people are like, what is this thing? Let's let's check it

3 (7m 23s):
out, right exactly. And so it's coupling these big viral moments that Garner media attention, but also just spread the word organic lead to potentially millions of people who have never heard of a movement like this before but would totally want to participate in one and then giving them routine consistent opportunities and structures within their own communities that they can take action on the day-to-day. So it's like yes come to DC we issued the call in over a thousand young people came to DC within 10 days three weeks following this action at Pelosi's office and then they went back to their communities and started local chapters where they can continue the work.

3 (8m 3s):
And so I think you know both Meaning the viral moments but also the brass tacks day-to-day Grassroots organizing that is what builds power and local communities,

1 (8m 15s):
you know after the pandemic began there were so many people who really wanted to help Frontline healthcare workers, for example, or people who were doing essential Services. My wife got involved in a group called Frontline foods and literally overnight and this is really a lot of the people who kind of built this movement came from the tech sector and what what her observation was was how remarkable they were able to scale this organization to becoming a huge organization with millions of dollars in a matter of weeks. And these people have experienced scaling movements for scaling businesses. So for them, it was like, okay, here's the play book and it was so interesting to hear that perspective and I wonder whether there's something to that with what you're doing because what you're doing is life or death, right?

1 (9m 0s):
It's not about building the next tech company or how to get CBD delivered to your house. Faster with lard, you know, like or like how to get a pizza robot mate. This is about like our lives and the lives of our children what you're trying to do. So do you do look to those models for kind of inspiration on how to how to scale what you're doing to something? That is so big that it cannot be ignored.

3 (9m 24s):
Absolutely. I mean that that has to be the plan I think for us. We are also recognizing when you consider the expanse of what it means to tackle the climate crisis. It isn't just You know, okay, we decarbonise or whatever. There is a whole. I mean we probably have to pass dozens of pieces of legislation at the federal level over the next decade of time, which means that people with our values have to govern and hold on to govern compact works for perhaps a decade or longer. I mean growing up sort of at the line between the death of bipartisanship and the birth of political tribalism and it is almost inconceivable for me, too.

3 (10m 5s):
Imagine the federal government being able to pass that level of policy. So for us to exert the kind of pressure both outside the halls of Congress as well as electing the kind of people who can exert internal pressure that will require a movement of millions and what Sunrise is attempting to do is, you know, taking direct action, but also ultimately we are going to have to create a movement that has millions of people that can quite literally bring business as usual. To a halt in this country that can say, you know, what like our institutions our government our towns our cities they cannot continue to operate as though this crisis is not upon us and that will require many many more millions of people being in the streets

1 (10m 53s):
first Unity. It's very frustrating. I think for many people that climate change has become a political issue because yes hurricanes kill Democrats and Republicans. I live in Northern California the choking smoke damage the lungs of On the left and the right it doesn't matter who you are climate change is real. It's a scientific fact in the fact that it's controversial is insane, but that's the reality. So opponents of what you do of what you're trying to do. They have played a very powerful game of seizing power and a pursuit of power at the expense of things like bipartisanship and compromise. Do you now believe that people in your generation and people with your political?

1 (11m 35s):
Values have to actually do the same thing, but from the other side of the aisle.

3 (11m 41s):
Yeah. Absolutely. I think we realized very early on we cannot continue to just rail against a set of people in the political establishment who do not come from our communities who do not hold our values. We have to kick people like that out of office and we have to replace them with people who will fight for our communities and that might not happen in the next two years or the next. Three years, but we are showing right now that young people, you know people in general are ready to get politically activated. There are lots of Democrats who while they made purport to understand the science have not taken action or seated the dire warnings and are not fighting with with a deep understanding and visceral understanding of what the calamities are ahead of us.

3 (12m 28s):
And so, you know, we saw Jamal Doman house Elliot angle in New York 14 Sunrise teenagers, literally. Nature's made 850,000 of the 1.3 million phone calls that were made to voters in his district ultimately helping him defeat Eliot Engel. Like I'm watching 14 year olds who can't even vote in this election who are training and leading hundreds of other young people in how to get politically activated. So this is a possibility. I feel a lot of Hope around that and I think our next generation is is fully activated

1 (13m 3s):
when we come back in just a moment for

3 (13m 5s):
He

1 (13m 6s):
talks more about how Sunrise brings new voices into the movement and also how it responds to criticism about its tactics. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. And one more thing the New York Times best-selling book how I built. This is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world.

1 (13m 55s):
It's filled with tons of stories. You haven't heard about how some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started

3 (14m 2s):
out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available. Well, wherever you buy your

1 (14m 8s):
books. Welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition and I'm talking with for SHINee prakash the co-founder and executive director of Sunrise movement and earlier. We heard her talk about the sit-in that they did at Nancy Pelosi's office back in 2018 today. A lot of people tell varshney that that was a great strategic move. But at the time sunrise got quite a bit of pushback

3 (14m 36s):
that day I was getting Call after call after call from reporters being like why on Earth. Are you going after Democrats? Why on Earth would you do that? Why would you make these choices? And I mean, we've also gone after Republicans in the same way asking like, why do you need to use these sort of disruptive conflict oriented tactics, but the truth is like it has sparked the conversation, you know, many of these tactics that were used really we learned from studying the Civil Rights Movement who were expert

1 (15m 7s):
strategist amazing. Organizers, I mean the bus yeah is one of the best anybody wants to start a business to read about the bus boycotts right now how in the methodical careful planning that went into that that's organized thousands of people and then create no carpals to bring people to

3 (15m 28s):
work and project see in Birmingham stood for project confrontation. And this was you know, these were you know, strategically wielded moments of action that were aimed at forcing. Ting an entire nation to Grapple with the reality of black Americans in this country and you saw kids getting shot at and firehose and Unleashed dogs upon and it was something that woke up the nation to the crisis at hand around white supremacy. And so, you know, I don't think we're at that stage quite yet with the climate movement, but I think for people to truly understand, you know, the reason why we You Civil Disobedience for the reason why we take this type of of action is so people so that we can bring the kind of private suffering that is happening all across the country into public relief and force that into the national dialogue and debate.

1 (16m 24s):
Yep, virginie. It's interesting because you understand the urgency of climate action and many many people do but there are many people who for some reason. I'm sure you've encountered them who just don't it might be somebody who's afraid of losing their job or that they work in an industry that depends on you know, fossil fuels or whatever. It might be. Do you even try to engage those people or do you focus on on just energizing people who are already who already believe in in the

3 (16m 56s):
science, I would For the most part we focus on those who understand the reality of the climate crisis who are terrified about it and want to do something about it, but haven't yet found the community or the movement to participate in and I do find that fear holds those people back as well young people actually have both political parties are terrified about the climate crisis and we know that young people support moving to a renewable energy economy, you know in supermajorities. The problem is a lot of those duels are sort of standing on the sidelines and most of the reason why they are standing on the sidelines is because they literally have not been asked to join what we found was for a very long time.

3 (17m 40s):
The climate movement was kind of doing a lot of preaching to the choir a lot of navel-gazing if they even had Grassroots organizing efforts at all. A lot of them did not they were either, you know on the hill lobbying efforts or policy Ventures, and actually it's Relatively new that we have mass organizations that are targeting everyday people who have not participated in movements before to join in and I find the most effective ways to bring individuals into the movement is one literally to ask them and see what they say. I think a lot of people do not have the quest ask the question. Will you join a movement but to helping people identify like, what's your skin in the game?

3 (18m 24s):
What's your stake in? This fight? Who do you Love what do you love that stands to booze in the midst of the climate crisis for me? Like I'm the child of two immigrants and the story of the way. The climate crisis is unfolding in India affects me super deeply it is the reason I think why I so clearly pursued the path of climate action. And so I think if you can if you can identify that fire that is already burning with you and bring it out. That is the spark that gets you

1 (18m 55s):
involved. I'm getting a couple questions. Here so I won't get to all of them and thank you for asking them folks. This is a games chain from Facebook. James asks, how do you go about fundraising because it costs money to do these campaigns and to get the word out and I know that you're probably almost entirely volunteer run. So how do you actually raise the money to amplify your voice?

3 (19m 16s):
So we really rely on those Grassroots donations as well as foundations. And so we run a really robust Grassroots program and and overly ask people to become monthly donors. So that is like the most sustainable way and grasses variations are also amazing because they allow us to not necessarily have to be beholden to foundations or wealthy individuals that allows to be buckled into like the everyday people that were trying to organize.

1 (19m 45s):
Are you willing to take money from corporations or from Big funders in order to you know, in order to be able to play hardball?

3 (19m 58s):
Yeah, I mean, I think we're Discerning about which funders we actually take money from we do take money from foundations. I think the key here is that you can do quite a lot with not that much money. I mean if you think about the first year in 2018, when we did that Pelosi action when the green New Deal became a national conversation what we saw those thousands and thousands of young people come out of the woodwork for the first time. We were working on a minuscule budget like Like miniscule, we had a very very small team. I think we can't underestimate underdogs and the situation especially after the dogs who are terrified for our future and are willing to do whatever we need to do to ensure that the future doesn't unfold in the way that we are, you know, the future that we are barreling towards there's a real question of at what point does that not become enough.

3 (20m 53s):
Do you need more resources? But I think we have a lot of money at our disposal. Not just a sunrise. But as the entire left or the environmental movement, the question is is that being wielded effectively, or is it not

1 (21m 6s):
do you imagine like there was a you know a moment in the you know in the last decade where like the tea party and the freedom caucus, you know, they really actually put a lot of pressure on conservatives moderate Republicans of the 80s and 90s aren't really around in the Congress anymore because these Grassroots Asians were very effective the Tea Party and others that really challenge candidates and primary races and so on is your goal eventually to make this movement. So powerful that you can actually do a version of that that you can go into congressional districts and endorse a candidate and support a candidate that may turn, you know, a more moderate or conservative Democrat and you know bringing a more Progressive Democrat as the as the

3 (21m 53s):
nominee exactly. I think what the Republicans did was they Shifted the entire center of gravity around the conversation towards a more conservative worldview and a lot of people, you know, they're like, why don't you just compromise with Republicans? Why don't you find some kind of middle ground? But the truth is they have pulled the entire conversation so far to the right that on climate change. I mean the middle ground is is probably worse than we are today. And so we need a new center of gravity and what young people People are doing is holding the Democratic party, but also the country as a whole to a standard of we have got to be in line with what science and Justice demands, you know, you're not about one political party, but not even about one political Champion or anything like that.

3 (22m 45s):
We are about the ultimate Mission at hand and if we stay true to that and we build a movement that is powerful enough, perhaps we can shift the entire conversation towards that

1 (22m 56s):
end. That's an From a conversation with varshney prakash co-founder and executive director of Sunrise movement to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilient series or other virtual and PR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzger with help from JC Howard will make sure Will Bruce Grant Matt Adams L. Mannion Gianna, Kappa Dona, John, Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Farah Safari.

1 (23m 37s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you back here in a few days. I'm Gyros and even listening to how I built this resilient Edition from NPR.