1 (0s):
Hey everyone. So I hope you are doing well. I hope you are safe and staying at home. These are obviously crazy times. But in these crazy moments, we are trying to find ways to learn about resilience and adaptation from some of the founders. We've interviewed and try to hear about how they're managing their businesses as creatively as possible under the circumstances. So we're doing a conversation with a different founder every Friday at noon Eastern Time a live video chat. That I'm going to be hosting with a different founder and we know a lot of you are looking for ideas and ways to keep momentum even during this difficult time. So if you have a chance to join us every Friday bring your questions, we're going to take your questions as well.

1 (44s):
You can find it at facebook.com / how I built this and you don't need a Facebook account to watch it or to join anyway, in case you missed the live conversation this past Friday every Thursday. We're going to post an excerpt right here in your podcast feed and Is the first one my guest on Friday was Jenny Burton Bauer founder of Jeni's Splendid ice creams. She joined me from her kitchen in Columbus

2 (1m 9s):
Ohio. This is yeah. This is the corner of my own kitchen. I went and got my professional ice cream machine and some other equipment from our our HQ Test Kitchen and this is where I spend half my day. I'm actually making videos to and posting those and asking people for flavor ideas. It's actually yeah. Started this week and it's kind of been a lot of fun. I really do think that ice cream is comforting and it's a good distraction. So we've been having fun here

1 (1m 41s):
Jenny one of the reasons why we really wanted you as our first death and we're so excited to have you is because you dealt with a huge crisis back in 2015. I think it was You had a situation where there was listeria found in one plant or one like tiny bit of listeria. You had to shut down your whole operation for weeks. I think it was you guys were hemorrhaging money. You were worried whether the business was going to survive but this would be your response to that was incredible. I mean you you were transparent and open with your customers you had blog posts you talked about what you were doing you close down all the Jenny's.

1 (2m 23s):
Ops, I mean this was was could have killed your whole business and not only did you recover but your you thrived you're much bigger company today and this is a different crisis. It's a different ball game. So there is no Playbook but talk a little bit about I don't know. I mean are there lessons from that experience for you to that? You're kind of able to apply creatively right. Now,

2 (2m 47s):
it definitely thinks so, I mean in 2015, what was you know looking back? Maybe it's time we were doing the same thing we're doing now, which is doing the best we can we could at the time and so we were when you can't make necessarily make sense of something you sort of fall back on your values and you let them lead you and and so in doing that in 2015, we proved we close everything down brought everything back we did the recall and we prevented any kind of outbreak which was really awesome and awesome being it just an incredible effort from a lot of people and we did it very quickly now, it's like it Similar in that we want to be able to make it to assess the situation to accept the situation and then to create a plan to move quickly if possible.

2 (3m 35s):
So we began this process a week and a half ago or so and we've been able to act very very very quickly. We had a bunch of sort of levels of what our stores might look like when we didn't know what the future was going to be like even the next five hours, you know. And and we've created plans for every channel in that way

1 (3m 57s):
and you've shut down all of your scoop shops.

2 (3m 59s):
We are still doing delivery and and the way that we've been able to do that is having an incredible team who was able to put together a very safe work environment and way of doing that so that the first people that we have to make feel good and comfort are our own team so they have to feel comfortable coming to work and we did that. And so then we can do deliveries. So the stores are closed for anything but delivery

1 (4m 28s):
in terms of like your your business, right? I mean this these are uncertain times a lot of people watching run small businesses. There are I've been talking I've been on the phone and and texting with tons of Founders have been on the show and you know, obviously I understandably a lot of them are really worried right now. They're concerned about their employees and how they're going to continue to meet payroll. I mean some company He's have enough cash for maybe 30 45 days because no one plans for a zero Revenue day. Most companies don't have 18 months of cash sitting around because they're investing that in our D or in new products or in production or inventory in your case ice cream making ice cream, you know in different flavors.

1 (5m 14s):
So tell me about your situation. I mean, is there any way to know how you're going to be impacted the company will impacted by

2 (5m 23s):
this I mean, you're right. We don't you know, we're like every other company we don't have 18 months to you know, just you know cash sitting around it we can just do this. So the plans are coming together as we speak. We feel very confident. We will survive. I think that it goes back and this is where I always go but it's really a proven that so many times in my company in my story. I do think it goes back to community and when your community loves you and values you and your community follows you wherever you go is not necessarily where you live, although that's important. But it's anyone you touched all day long every day. Those are the people that make that sort of make up your life. That's your community. And if that's really important to you.

2 (6m 5s):
Those people don't want to see you go away or what your work and in the end. It's not about money or about profit or about, you know, all of operation all the things it ends up in crisis. It ends up. How many people are you affecting on a daily basis positively and that's important and that's right. Now we'll See, we don't know what the future is going to be like but we do know that we're in it together. Yeah,

1 (6m 30s):
by the way your I mean one of the cool things that you're doing you mentioned earlier is your kind of crowd sourcing ideas for new flavors. I mean you're using this time like I think all of us, you know to try and think creatively I mean we're doing these Facebook online conversations live conversations every week now the resume and we're still doing how I built this and we're coming up with creative ways to interview people who by not bringing them to the studio. And so I love this idea that your crowdsourcing flavors any any cool labor ideas so far. Can you give us a guy like a sense of what what you're experimenting with?

2 (7m 7s):
So I was just going to I so I asked people to come up with some like just to talk to send me memories, you know, what was ask your grandfather Yeah, you know and those were the ones that I got that I'll I read it was a thousands between DM's text messages and the comments just on the Is there were literally thousands and I answered almost everyone if I haven't gotten to yours. I will I'm still working my way through them. But I read every single one and and the longer ones, you know about, you know, they're the vacation and Michigan or the whatever, you know, like the grandfather who had some specific banana cream pie, but it had chocolate in it or whatever. Like there's there. Those are the those are the things that I'm running to here right now and I'm loving very very very much.

2 (7m 50s):
It just it's almost like it in the evening. I put out the called like two or three days. And since then in the evening, that's what I do is I go back and create some of those are just wonderful but those stories that's what's so exciting. And interesting to me is those stories and so I'm hoping to come up with some good flavors based on I don't know

1 (8m 8s):
I got it made me think about all those flavors that that I used to love when I was a kid, like like rainbow sherbert, you know, there's something so special about rainbow sherbert, you know, I

2 (8m 18s):
can't be so excited to get in a glass or metal foot in Yes, right. Yeah, maybe a doily or something like that with my grandparents. Yeah. I just I felt so special when I was with my grandparents and that's something that I would order at the end of a meal with them. Like it makes me feel so special but that's that's exactly the kinds of stories that I I love

1 (8m 43s):
it. All right, Jenny. We got some questions coming in from from our viewers to any one of the secrets of your success has been the community that you built first and Columbus. I mean you started out at like You know food halls, you know sort of people have seen you since you were a young woman, you know, younger woman doing this it at the food halls in Columbus and you really over time that community that sort of that you built. They stepped up and supported you during times of Crisis for Jenny's now is another time of Crisis a question from Lindsay Johnson dros. She asks, what are some ways that you built your community in the beginning. That prepared you for this

2 (9m 25s):
moment. I think that everything for me and for our company goes back to that place when you're in the market every day you unlearn so many wonderful lessons. Of course, I as an ice cream maker learned about ingredients and how they're grown how they're made whether they're from far away or near but I also learned about community and I think we talked about this and we did our however bill this but I moved every year growing up. I didn't really have a sense of community no until I got there. In my early twenties when I was 22, and I filled a ton in there and I didn't know some of them work Merchants were mad at me for doing stupid stuff in the early days or whatever, but I learned this like family I learned but I didn't like that.

2 (10m 9s):
I wanted to make them, you know, I want to make them proud of me and I sort of learned as I went and I kept adjusting that but but listening to their feedback constantly over time. I learned that a rising tide lifts All Ships that were that we're all in this together that that I represent this community and the I have to do my part to in a market bring people down. I can't just rely on the people. They were bringing down to the market and then I have to I have to represent the standards of the community. And if not, maybe even lift those standards in my own unique way. All of these amazing lessons really to come back to the market is an indoor Public Market a farmers market. I think you learn a lot even in Big Business from these tiny places and I have as mottos start small and build every project I've ever done has been from perspective start small and build including the one I'm doing on Instagram right now, which I'm learning how to edit videos and all these things and yeah, you know, whatever but you can just start something and build but if you're listening to that feedback and open to it, I think that's important and then people feel like they're a part of what you do.

2 (11m 11s):
Of course. I haven't even talked about them when you know, the millions of people who are coming through the market that I got to learn from every year, but I think it's said that like just starting something putting it out there listening incorporating and continue to do

1 (11m 22s):
that. This is a question from the Question from Kevin Dremel Kevin asks, and I'm assuming Kevin has a food business. He says, you know, what suggestions do you have for businesses that just started as this whole issue began he's saying, you know, is it better to push out are the products through the internet or to kind of step back ride it out until you can do do like tasting demos. I mean God if you start a food company today is you know with your company you got to do tasting demos if you just launched your your business and you're in It's about food a food related product and it's tough. So what in the meantime while we're waiting would it what I mean, is it is it worth while to kind of try and push it out through social media through the internet to see it.

1 (12m 12s):
At least you could get it in front of people's eyes.

2 (12m 14s):
It's that's a really tough question to answer without knowing exactly what that kind of business is and the perishability the food and so on and and just what the kind of food is, but I would say yeah, there's are the two paths either. Just sort of pause hit pause and wait, you might be in a better position because then you can go back out and step on the gas. But there's a lot of opportunity right now. I mean, I don't remember what they said, but it might be our re cam is up. Maybe it's five or seven times. Wow, kind of crazy. Like we're running out of boxes and we have to speed up that and get that out. So and it's Ari was always 12% of our business which is which is pretty great for that small channels.

2 (12m 56s):
To continue to build me. It's not it's not tiny. So there are a lot of opportunities now if you can get the word out and that's always the challenge is getting word out but you know, I always say one person at a time and if you just need to fight forward on social media now not person one person at a time. That's fine. You find the person you have a conversation with media are still hungry for stories are positive right now. So, you know, if you're in a position where you can send out samples and things like that, I think it's going to be tough now, but it's not insurmountable. You can do it. Yeah that one.

1 (13m 26s):
Very important before we go. I want to just thank everyone watching we didn't get to all your questions. But thank You Jennie. I am so grateful for everything you do. You're such a wonderful person and thank you for your advice and and we'll we'll stay in touch will keep talking and maybe I'll update our audience on any updates you have for me too.

2 (13m 47s):
Well, thanks so much. It's so much fun to be with you and stay

1 (13m 49s):
safe. That was Jenny Burton Bauer of Jeni's Splendid ice creams on our new weekly live video. Your conversation we're going to be putting excerpts of these conversations in your podcast feed every Thursday for the time being and we're doing the actual conversations every Friday on Facebook live and this Friday April 3rd, bring your questions for me and Susan Griffin black of co-products. She's going to be talking about how they've been really pivoting from essential oils to hand sanitizer that's happening at 12 noon Eastern Time 9:00 a.m. Pacific this Friday April 3rd, you can find it at facebook.com how I built this you don't need a Facebook account to watch again.

1 (14m 29s):
That's nine a m-- Pacific 12 noon Eastern at facebook.com slash how I built this this Friday. See you there.