1 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience addition. This is where we've been talking with entrepreneurs about how to think creatively during this really disruptive moment. And in addition to a global health and economic crisis. We're also facing a long-standing racial Justice crisis, the mass movements and demonstrations are opening up a whole series of conversations about race Justice representation and fairness, and you've probably even noticing companies big And small putting out statements in support of these conversations with pledges to take action. So today, we're going to hear from live on Hutchinson. She's the founder of a consulting firm in the Bay Area called Ready Set.

1 (42s):
They help companies become more inclusive. Here's an excerpt from the live conversation. I had with wive on earlier this week, which you can also watch at facebook.com slash how I built this and just a quick note. There are a few moments where the internet connection gets a little glitchy, but it doesn't last Long, so first of all, how are you doing? I mean, we're in the middle of a global economic health crisis Mass demonstrations. It's I mean the pace of change and the things that are coming out us is almost it's overwhelming, right? Yeah.

3 (1m 21s):
Yeah, and I you know, I talked to my mother the other day who was in Detroit during the 68 riots. And she was like, you know, this feels the exact same but it also feels different because the the people that I've ever see people out in the street look different, you know, and so in some ways, I think we're at a real precipice, you know, we're at a point where we could kind of push for revolutionary change right now, or we can not deny the power of the moment that were in so I'm certainly hoping that it's the

1 (1m 58s):
former live on. As you know, the show is about entrepreneurs and you came to the summit and you are an entrepreneur your founder of a business called Ready Set for people who aren't familiar with it. Can you just tell us a little bit about ready

3 (2m 11s):
set? Yeah and happy to ready set is it's a high-touch boutique consulting firm. We really specialize in building human-centric management practices that embeds diversity equity and inclusion throughout the

1 (2m 25s):
business like walk me through a little bit with about your approach like when you are Brought on by company to work with them. What are some of the things that you you start to do? I think very early

3 (2m 38s):
on we decided we wanted to be a little bit different. So just to kind of set the stage for you when I started companies were kind of in the place where some of them recognize diversity and inclusion were an issue but many of them thought you could solve the issue with like a one-off training an unconscious bias training or you know these quick kind of ad hoc. Should have said we saw that that didn't work. So we decided we were going to be very intentional about really providing an Evidence backed up coach that was customized for the companies that we worked with. So we go and we go really close look at what's happening in their organizations.

3 (3m 17s):
We talk to the people who work there. We look at their policies and processes and we try to figure out what are some strengths this order to has for sure. How do we build off of those but where are Are the gaps where people falling through the cracks? Where's the culture coming apart? Where is there a lack of communication lack of transparency Etc. And then based on that we craft our support for the organization and that could look like a training. Although that would be a train that's customized for them or it could be through the provision of advisory support or it could be revamping, you know from the top down their policies their processes Etc.

3 (3m 59s):
It really depends on the

1 (4m 0s):
Yet. I mean one of the things that is so clear and evident is that organizations that have the best of intentions to be diverse environments and to be inclusive environments and fall short of that need to have difficult conversations and need to have uncomfortable conversations and human beings are kind of wire to avoid that to avoid conflict. Right? Most humans don't want to be in discomfort. It's why so many of us don't exercise because exercises done. Evil Bad analogy, but you know discomfort is to me it seems like we are at a moment where discomfort has to be front and center.

3 (4m 40s):
I think you're right and I would say it even goes deeper than that. I think if you look at the history of work in this country, it's always been segregated. Right? It's always been segmented. And so we're working within systems that weren't designed be inclusive. So even if we have the best intentions the Patients that we were for how we structure them who gives to advance what's considered professional how we prove our competency all of those are biased in some way towards a certain kind of individual and so we have to undo those biases and that and to your point that process can be really really uncomfortable and it ready set.

3 (5m 21s):
We like to say it's like a muscle you don't you know, if we all think we can show up in a moment and be somebody's hero or say the right thing, but we've Also all had that moment where we're in a uncomfortable or weird situation and you know, we leave it and then two seconds later. We're like, oh I should have said this or I could have handled it this way and that's because that's natural right? It's because fight or flight and we're not always practiced and how to navigate it and we don't want to disturb the relationships we have so that is part of what Ready Set teaches folks to do,

1 (5m 55s):
you know this but there's a lot of talk is a mention about diversity inclusion, especially in Silicon Valley. You are based in the Bay Area. So you deal with a lot of these tech companies and VC companies the vast majority of are not diverse. There's an article in wired in recent days as something like between 2013 and 2017 out of all venture-backed founders only 1% were African-American entrepreneurs and and let's be clear. This is not for a lack of investment opportunities, right? I mean, there are plenty of black entrepreneurs looking for funding but They don't the same connections or ins or networks or Business Schools has for whatever it is at these VC firms.

1 (6m 38s):
Right?

3 (6m 39s):
Well, I think it's partially that I also think that there's a lot of bias and BCC like we have black entrepreneurs who voted or the right schools, whatever that means who you know have access to some of these networks. They also don't get funded. So I think in Silicon Valley, there's a culture of pattern matching which is Very limiting in a lot of ways, but when you know, he's he's picking the next Mark Zuckerberg. They don't picture a black kid, you know, they don't picture a black woman a lot of times the people that they take a leap of faith on that they invest in with just a slide deck. I think those days are long gone, but the people who they used to best and with just a slide deck and then idea they weren't they weren't black.

3 (7m 25s):
They look like those species and they reminded those species at themselves. And and so I think the pipeline and the in that work is part of it, but I think also a big part of it is just the biased towards a certain kind of entrepreneur that builds certain kind of

1 (7m 42s):
business. You know, I know that you joined black tech for black lives. It's committed to a set of specific actions in the tech industry it can you talk a little bit about some of the ideas recommendations proposals that you're putting forward.

3 (7m 57s):
Yeah, so I think Ted black lives it's about leveraging the black community and allies in Tech to push for social change and to create connections between us and the people on the ground people working and Grassroots organizations working with the city to people who've done this work for years locally so that we can leverage our privilege on their behalf. So we launched with a call to action essentially for both folks and our allies in the tech industry. We really wanted people to move from words because it's super easy to sign a pledge to actually committing do something.

3 (8m 44s):
And so those those action items that we suggested run the gamut from build more Equitable tech companies fun tech companies supporting criminal justice organizations and organizations that are committed to Accountability in the police and what we're really trying to do is build something that feels holistic and informed by unity activity. I think quite often it can be tempting for someone to see you know these marches and and say we're going to start our own thing and they're people who've been doing this for a really long time and I think the best use of our energy be support their work to build up black folks locally.

3 (9m 26s):
And that's the last thing I'll say about it. Is that black tech for black? Lives is modeled on the idea that local action can be a catalyst for broader change. And so we're really focusing on Oakland and the San Francisco Bay Area. There are people who are interested in Black for a tech for black lives. In other parts of the country. We encourage them to use the action plan as a model and to work with the organizations and their cities as well

1 (9m 56s):
when we come back in just a moment if you're still wondering whether diversity training Really bring about meaningful change why Bond tells the story of how she saw that happen stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition and we're talking with wive on Hutchinson about how companies can build more inclusive workplaces.

1 (10m 43s):
Why Vaughn's consulting firm is based in the Bay Area. So she's worked with all types of companies from Tech to healthcare. And as with all these conversations. I've been having we opened it up to the audience and just a reminder. We're taking questions for why bond by Facebook Twitter and YouTube, so, please submit those questions. We have a question in from will he asks in a group setting and And maybe even in their own mind people believe they are not racist, but then they still exhibit races actions and he asks, how do you balance a systemic approach and curb undesirable individual actions? Because it does he says it doesn't seem like diversity alone is

3 (11m 19s):
enough. Yes. He's absolutely right. That's a great question. I think, you know we can start with training but it doesn't end there. So I think self education is important to your point understanding the ways in in which we all are racist understanding the way that systemic racism works and I and you know, I work with organizations in the workplace. So we do training on systemic racism at work. What does that mean? How do we understand it? How does this aquarium affect who we hire who we promote the communities that we're embedded into people's access to even getting to work. What does that mean? But I think that prayer in itself is not enough and if you really want to tackle systemic racism, and you really want to engage Each and behavioral change you have to have structures in place in your environment isn't device the behavior you want and that address the structural gaps that you've identified.

3 (12m 17s):
So for example, if you are maybe you are getting black people in the door, but they're not getting promoted and they're not in leadership positions. Well, something is wrong with how those people are being evaluated the assignments that they're given the mentorship and sponsorship opportunities they have And how they relate to their managers in this step is not necessarily really easy to solve. It's a lot more difficult to look for this than it is to just serve it your office and see how many black people you have their right and individually, I would say, you know, a lot of times organizations talk the talk really? Well, we've seen so many great black lives matter statements and we seen organizations and have really beautifully written values on their wall and the law At times those organizations are organizations that don't hold people accountable when they're harming other people or they don't reward people would do the cultural and inclusion work at their office and we know the behavior that gets rewarded and the behavior that punished or censored is what really forms the culture you can say words all you want you can go to all the trainings you want.

3 (13m 29s):
But if there's no accountability around personal behavior and how we build relationships and have live by our values and those values are ecstatic.

1 (13m 39s):
Yeah, I mean and in an environment today, we're so many businesses that use data for everything you would think and you can imagine that businesses can use data when it comes to diversity as well. I wonder whether you've encountered businesses and companies that actually evaluate and hold people accountable to the point where they are evaluated on their job Performance Based on promoting people of color and on on hiring people. Color and on having people of color in leadership positions around them above them. Have you seen anything like that where the CEO is evaluated that way and the CFO and on down and middle managers and so on

3 (14m 18s):
I've seen proposals for something like that. And I think we have to be really careful too because sometimes those can like push us into tokenism. I think the metrics to evaluate managers or you know, pretty old and closely tied to Traditional business outcomes and while those can be valuable, they don't necessarily reflect all of the aspects about managers job, you know, a lot of what a manager does is work with people. So I think to answer your question. No, I've not seen to have not seen companies to you that I've seen some proposals that would encourage organizations to do that, but I haven't really seen it in practice on the

1 (15m 2s):
ground. I know that you can't talk necessarily talk. Specific clients that you worked with but have you had an experience with a company? That's brought your team in where you actually have seen them walk the walk and talk the talk or begin to approach it that way. Yes.

3 (15m 17s):
I have a favorite experience and this is like very very close to my heart because I used to work in public health International, but we work with a hospital system in the area and you know, no work environments perfect and not going to say that they're Perfect, but we did see as we saw a dramatic increase in the number of residents from underrepresented groups that went through the program. So when we started it with something like 12% and eventually it went up to do at 45% We saw folks graduating who attended our sessions with in bringing our trainings to the hospitals that they were working in.

3 (15m 58s):
We saw people having really deep conversations about racism and Tobias and again the culture of that organization not perfect. They're in the middle of their transformation. But we've seen some really positive indication and what I really love about this example is that you know, this affects people's lives when a doctor walks into a room and they're aware of their own biases. They're much less likely to to treat a patient in the way that can negatively impact Healthcare outcomes. So for me, that's one of my that's that's the thing that I reflect back. Back when I think about positive impact that feels really really strong for me for organ fiction that aren't necessarily Healthcare organizations on the front lines.

3 (16m 43s):
We work with a lot of tech organizations, you know, we do see some structural changes some policy changes the thing with this work though is that it's long and hard we're seeing this is now in the Grassroots movement and takes time to affect sustain change and I'm always very conservative about saying we've done everything you're there, but we've certainly

1 (17m 4s):
In Muscat integration, one of the crazy things about how I built this is, you know, it's a show about entrepreneurship and a lot of people don't know that actually entrepreneurship has been declining in the United States over the last 3040 years and it's been particularly acute in the African-American Community. I was read an article in the Washington monthly came out a few years ago and there's some really just just very surprising statistics like in the I'm looking at my notes Here in 1985. There were 60 black owned banks in the United. States today, there are only 23 in the 1980s. They were 50 black owned insurance companies today only to remain a lot of this has to do with big companies consolidating buying up smaller ones a lot of his basic lack of access to Capital to loans and Investments.

1 (17m 51s):
And and I think this is a big part of the discussion that the demonstrations that we're seeing aren't just about racial Justice. They're also about economic Justice because they're connected. Those things are

3 (18m 3s):
connected. Yeah. I think it's I think it's interesting when we think about entrepreneurship particularly as it relates to black folks because I think when we look at larger black businesses that pictures right away, we see consolidation, but we also know that like some of the fastest growing groups of entrepreneurs are black like black women and fastest growing group of entrepreneurs, but we also are businesses tend to be smaller. We tend to hit a ceiling fairly quickly. We're not necessarily able to stay over the long term. So I think to your point, you know, there is energy there and I think a lot of people a lot of black people I've met who are entrepreneurs are actually saying I chose this path because I no longer want to be in an environment where I feel it's a racist environment.

3 (18m 52s):
I feel unsafe because my race where I can advance because of my race and that was my story. I left organization that was incredibly harmful to my well-being and I didn't realize that Part of that was driven by race them until the set back and saw it. But I got lucky. I had people who were willing to back me. But I also had a lot of privilege, you know, you talk about those schools and those pipelines guy like I went to Harper so, you know able to walk in a room and check somebody's box and a lot of black entrepreneurs don't necessarily have that and I think it's a missed opportunity as well. I think a lot of times economic Justice is framed almost as chair.

3 (19m 34s):
Petit when we see that the Innovation happening in Black spaces creative spaces quite often, it's just not even say it in the same way that it is when it's done in non black and white spaces, I think for some positive indications like I don't know if you've how closely you say on Twitter, but publishing paid me where people are, you know doing the salary transparency around with their publishing deals, look-alike salary transparency within organizations white people. On black people leveraging their privilege and giving folks just access to the information because quite often we don't know, you know, we don't know how much somebody's getting paid and how much somebody's getting some day and that's part of the problem.

3 (20m 18s):
You know, I find those boots to be to be really really encouraging.

1 (20m 23s):
I want to get to one more question from our audience before we wrap up. This is from Claire. She asks them. What are some ways that organizations can amplify black voices pass the mic without bordering on tokenism. Zamora or being

3 (20m 35s):
performative? That's a really great question. There are a lot of really good resources out there right now circulating in response to protests and movement happening on the ground. I would first encourage organizations to look there. I think the challenge relying too much on the black voices within your organization is quite often black people do culture work diversity and inclusion work and a lot of Ocean or labor? So if tokenization is something you want to avoid, I think first doing that self-education second. And I know it's a this out of self-interest with bringing in an expert and accepting that the black people in your organization are want to do or speak to some of the questions that you all may have around raised how to improve your organization.

3 (21m 25s):
But where you are relying on black people to do that work that work is compensated and those black people are elevated as leaders and they're given In power to make the changes that they're suggesting. I think a lot of us have kind of done this dance over the past few years where we are the first point of contact when something serious happens, and we make a bunch of suggestions. A lot of them are ignored. We don't get

1 (21m 52s):
promoted. We don't get any

3 (21m 55s):
credit for that work and we don't get access to leadership positions and sometimes we're punished behind the scenes for saying the wrong thing. So I think you To back up that quest for knowledge with rewarding the people who are saying this is what we need to do to fix our culture. So those are some of the things that I would suggest and I would finally say that this is this is long-term work for us to really think about how we're leveraging this moment is going to require sustained effort and I think that is also where your business can really move from. We're just talking to the talk to we're walking the walk where investing over the long term and we're putting forth sustained effort

1 (22m 38s):
by Von. Thank you so much for joining us for being here on the podcast. Thank you for having me. That's an excerpt from my conversation with why Bond Hutchinson the founder and CEO of ready set to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience, Series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney Gianna, Kappa, Dona Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

1 (23m 18s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you right back here in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.