1 (0s):
Hey everyone. So as some of you know, we've just started a new series of conversations on Facebook live where each week. I talked to Founders and entrepreneurs about how they're dealing with the new normal that we're all living under now and we hope these conversations give you a little jolt of optimism during these otherwise difficult times now in case you miss these conversations live, we're going to be posting an excerpt right here every Thursday in your podcast feed and today's guest is Susan Griffin black founder of co-products. CEO makes a whole line of body skin and hair care products but since the covid-19 crisis they pivoted to pretty much only making hand sanitizer and hand soap which is why Susan wasn't at home when we talked to her.

1 (44s):
She was actually in her office in San Rafael, California.

2 (47s):
We are an excluded employer because we're making only hand sanitizers and hand soap. And so what that means is two-thirds of the people are working from home. And crew is here on two shifts are all the people who make our products fill our products and ship our products plus support positions like quality control and and so forth and then Senior leadership, we depending on our situations we've been taking turns just coming in and making sure that people are okay. So we have every safety protocol in place and our main concern is that people are healthy and safe.

2 (1m 33s):
I mean after all we're making hand sanitizer that that's our job here and we are finding other than being dealing with these unsettling times and being overwhelmed with demand that we are united in a sense of purpose. That is daunting. Sometimes you know,

1 (1m 59s):
what about you? Their product lines have you kind of just Frozen those and focused focusing primarily on hand sanitizers and

2 (2m 6s):
soaps? Yes, we devoted production to mostly hand sanitizers supported by hand soap and we're working on other relationships with country one contract manufacturer that we have been in relationship with for a long time to see if they can help us out, you know during these

1 (2m 26s):
times Susan obviously super uncertain times. For a lot of businesses a lot of Founders who found the show. I've been in touch with I've talked to a lot of small business owners through social media and people are really worried people are really freaking out especially in companies and in businesses where you know, you need human to human interaction. First of all, it sounds like right now your your business is doing fine. I mean, maybe strangely even better than normal.

2 (2m 58s):
Well, I would say there's a certain amount. Out of stability that comes with the increased demand and in a more orderly way because we know what we're making a lot of times, you know, we are forecasting the best we can and this is a situation a very unique situation where we just can't make enough to meet the demand. It's daunting. We are staying very flexible to the need because it became obvious six weeks ago that if R not getting hand sanitizer to first time responders then what are we doing? Like, you know, you've got pallets on trucks you've got tons in warehouses, but they're not, you know, it's not where people actually needed the most so we just keep thinking and reallocating and responding as intentionally and consciously as we can as needs arise and as we just redistribute products,

1 (3m 56s):
right, do you by the way in terms of Employees because you people have to come in to work at the plant to make hand sanitizer to make soap. How are you sort of maintaining, you know Health at the workplace. This is from from Lani Cafe. She's asking that

2 (4m 15s):
question, right? So there's a daily check in and check out their sanitizers everywhere and the of course, we're observing social distancing. We just ordered cloth masks and of course in Compounding everyone wears masks and goggles all the time. Everyone has hair nets on so it's really enforcing and modeling what it is that we can all do to help each other through for

1 (4m 43s):
sure. By the way. Have you have you had to ramp up hiring to I mean have you had to bring on additional help

2 (4m 49s):
we have in production. So one of the things we did was we reallocated some people who were doing some office work and BR now doing e-commerce shipping and then when we need help in production, it's we try to make it as internal as we possibly can. So but we have been

1 (5m 11s):
hiring Susan in terms of like from from a business standpoint. You alluded to the supply chain Challenge and that is probably going to pose increasing challenges because you rely on on getting lavender and oils from from all over the world where you know you Source them from very Vic places. So how do you begin to plan for the possibility of supply chain disruption with with your business

2 (5m 38s):
Yeah, It's Tricky. The simple answer is as best. We can by being in touch with our primary vendors and just trying to project as much as we can. And also we've just leave committed to quadrupling our inventory in certain items as quickly as we can. You know, we're just all working it together from our lavender supplier and are you know sugar-based alcohol supplier in Brazil? And there's a lot of logistics, you know FDA has tightened some of these rules temporarily, you know, so distilleries are making hand sanitizer and but you know, it's not really a part-time gig

1 (6m 24s):
right? There's a question from Zach from Philadelphia. What is the current state and the future outlook for supply chain? Of the alcohol used in your hand sanitizer. You mentioned Brazil. What's the outlook for the alcohol? I mean this is there a possibility that we may find ourselves in a shortage of of that

2 (6m 41s):
ingredient. I don't think so because we have so many there are a lot of variations on the theme the quality that we've been working with prefer and have procured over the past 20 years has been, you know organic alcohol from sugarcane in Brazil and we were Probably one of the first ones in the marketplace to use that there's also non-GMO corn alcohol that's available. And then there's plenty of GMO corn alcohol available in this country. So it's a matter of the quality of ingredients and not everyone wants the alcohol but we use because it's it's more

1 (7m 22s):
expensive Susan. This is a question from Leanne and San Diego. She's asked, you know given that you've really ramped up production on Sanitizers. Have you found a way to give it to Frontline healthcare workers to maybe maybe even make it available for free to people working on the front lines.

2 (7m 42s):
Yes will be donated to all of the emergency rooms and the police the firemen and then now we are providing sanitizers to the local governments and we donated Thousand hand sanitizers to lift in the beginning so that their drivers were safe and people who were in cars were safe. And also, you know, I we have one little store in Mill Valley and it occurred to me that the markets closed by can't get hand sanitizer because they go through Distributors.

2 (8m 22s):
So it leaves our warehouse on a pallet it goes over here then I got you know, so I would just stand outside and hand out. I just went to every Supermarket and gave every checkout person hand sanitizer, you know, I I just take it with me every restaurant takeout place. You'll see our sanitizer. I've personally given families that I see walking down the street so as much as we can help and give away and donate we are like on the ground doing that.

1 (8m 54s):
Here's a question from Shauna in Miami, which I think is a really kind of an interesting question. You know, she's Says she's seeing a lot of people with kind of a lifestyle change people are trying to you know, kind of keep their immune systems strong and I don't know. I mean, I mean is there is there a world where you can imagine that that actually everything that happens after this is Everything Will Change even the way we we sort of our own personal approach to health.

2 (9m 22s):
Hmm. I do think that realize our priorities in a in a much more human and healthy way. Bye. Slowing down and quieting down and not moving around so much that were so much less distracted. So I do think people will take heed and try to figure out what it is that has heart and meaning and you can't take your health for granted and clean hands will be like brushing your teeth. So it's a it's a real wake-up call and a global wake-up call.

1 (9m 59s):
I know so. Susan I want to just talk a little bit about kind of the thing that you've really been focused on throughout your career, which is self-care, right which is not always easy for everybody. And normally we're so busy, you know, we get up and we we've got these busy days and most of us spend an hour or two at our homes every day because we're out of but now we're all in what are some things that you think people could do. I mean, I just give you one quick thing that I've been doing I drink coffee like I like 10 2 cups of coffee a day, but I just stopped drinking it. Because it was like heightening in my anxiety because coffee makes your heart beat, right? So I've just been drinking tea and that's been actually great. It's been really great. What are kind of some self-care things because a big part of what you do is make essential oils and personal care

2 (10m 44s):
products. Yeah. It's so difficult and I think that news fast for sure extracting yourself from that taking a break going outside getting fresh air having a cup of tea not while reading email. Al's just sitting still really for five or ten minutes outside. Also, I learned to meditate easily when my son who's now 33 was to in the bathtub because I found that and this is especially for you know, when you're with kids all day homeschooling, you know hot water is really good medicine any any time and it's accessible.

2 (11m 24s):
So even if you take a few drops of eucalyptus or lavender put it on the shower floor. Close the door put a towel under it and make sort of a quasi little steam room sitting there for a little bit. Turn the water down take a shower. It just it changes everything and just getting outside for a 10-minute walk move, you know, inhale fresh air. I was saying to someone if you just took a sample of ten plants that are in your front yard that you don't know what they are. It's a really good family exercise. Sighs to just say oh this is you know Rosemary and this is and you just sort of getting a little bit more in touch with sense of place.

1 (12m 9s):
We have a small geranium plant on our back porch. We've been using it to make tea just pouring hot water and geranium, I'd learned that from my mom is amazing. All right. Thank you Susan and I hope to see you soon. After this after this craziness somehow it's

2 (12m 24s):
fixed virtual hug virtual hug.

1 (12m 26s):
Yes, that's Susan Griffin black co-founder of Ethiopia. X we're going to be putting these online conversations in your feed every Thursday and hosting the actual conversations every week on Facebook live this Friday, April 10th. I'll be live with Tristan Walker founder of Walker & Company had be talking to me about his skin care products and bevel the razor that his company makes and how they're dealing with the situation. Bring your questions for me and Tristan Walker on Friday, April 10th. That's at 12 noon Eastern 9 a.m. Pacific at facebook.com slash how I Built this you don't need a Facebook account to watch and if you want to find out more about our live conversations or other virtual NPR events go to NPR presents dot-org.

1 (13m 10s):
Thanks for listening stay safe, and we'll see you next week. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.