1 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more. Hey everyone. So I have a request if you value this show if you value the stories the lessons the wisdom and inspiration we bring to you if you think of me as your friend, which I am because even though millions of you. Are listening. I'm actually talking just to you right now. I need you to be there for me as well. And you can do that by supporting what I do and buying my book how I built this it is just out now and available everywhere and it doesn't cost more than a few cups of coffee and it's filled with wisdom and stories and ideas that will have you feeling inspired and fired up to Take On The World.

1 (56s):
So please if you love this show and what we do for you do us one back. And pick up how I built this wherever books are sold. Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience addition these episodes we talked with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how their meeting today's challenges with new strategies and ideas. And today. We're going to hear from Jeremy stoppelman the founder and CEO of Yelp. We first told Jeremy storie on the podcast in the summer of last year and should definitely check out that episode if you haven't heard it yet. And if you've ever used Yelp, you know that it's a way for consumers to find information and reviews and all kinds of businesses, but What a big things that people use it for is restaurants.

1 (1m 41s):
And so that's where my conversation with Jeremy started. This industry has just been absolutely hammered unlike any other industry travel and Leisure as well. So many people go to Yelp for restaurants. So did you anticipate that pretty quickly early on that restaurants were going to get hit or did that come as a surprise to you?

3 (2m 0s):
If we had some sense that restaurants were going to get hit one of our more senior product managers. It was Chinese. Person who had lots of contacts in China and was relaying like all the changes that restaurants were going through and China to try and adapt at the outset of the pandemic. It looked like this is crazy. Like, you know, they're doing all these things with temperature checks at the door and like delivery, you know new delivery things and partitions and it just seemed so unlikely that that could be our reality especially at that time call it early March when we were studying this and everything still felt normal, but it was pretty soon we could start. The impacts in some of the cities that were hardest hit in the u.s.

3 (2m 43s):
So for example Seattle and so, you know that obviously got us thinking about business ramifications and okay restaurants, you know, which is a big portion of our traffic are going to be hard hit. You know, what can we do? You know, we weren't going to try and charge restaurants for instance for that period where traffic was following and even if they were getting some value like, you know, the everyone is thrown into total chaos and like there really isn't a whole lot of point to advertising, you know as traffic is Falling like that. So so pulling together a bunch of different things to support the restaurant nightlife industry at that time became a big priority and ultimately culminated with about 32 million dollars, you know worth of forgiving fees and other things to support restaurants,

1 (3m 22s):
Jeremy your business model depends largely on advertising on businesses that advertise on the platform and and businesses that depend on ads have had a difficult time because companies are cutting back on their ad For obvious reasons, they've got to preserve cash in many cases and this has actually pretty dramatically affected your business Yelps business, right? I mean over the over the past year

3 (3m 48s):
that was one of the scariest things particularly about March and April, you know in a pandemic especially as things are shutting down who's buying every day. Right? Right. So that was my great fear was you know is our Revenue going to go towards zero, like maybe it's not zero, but is it To go towards zero pretty darn quickly. So we had some very stressful difficult conversations around like the different potentially catastrophic scenarios. What would we do? How do we survive? You know, is there a freeze the company and Amber type strategy literally was something we were talking about like where we just go down to those skeleton of staff and fits a nuclear winter type of situation fortunately the world did start to re-stabilize and as the Panic subsided, you know, there were business.

3 (4m 38s):
That actually we're doing even fine or good, you know, like as all of us were sheltered at home. Suddenly. If your toilet backed up your calling the plumber has ended up being more busier and some people started moving, you know later in the pandemics and mover traffic was doing reasonably well, and so there ended up being areas of our business because we are Diversified we're known obviously widely for restaurants, but we also have both refused and customers and all sorts of local Services categories as well and that area of the business. Has been quite resilient

1 (5m 9s):
contractors and and and so on. You know, it's interesting. I remember when you on the podcast you talked about to crisis moments. I remember one was when you were x.com and you were just totally terrified that I think that PayPal was going to like Crush you guys and your sleepless nights about that and then the other one was when you started Yelp and nobody came to the party like it was really just didn't gain any traction in the early months many months and you were really worried you had a lot of anxiety about and you talked about that and this sounds like Even more intense what you went through in March and April just probably personally I mean planning for a nuclear winter but in some senses like I wonder whether anticipating that possibility actually was in a sense probably the best way to game out what your strategy would be because in the end it didn't work out that way but it but you were planning for the

3 (6m 2s):
worst. Yeah, one of the things that I would say was beneficial of going to that off. Awful place in our minds. Well, you know, I'd say at the early part of the pandemic it's hard for people to really wrap their heads around the scope of the problem how big the problem is how it's going to change our lives. It just seems unbelievable. Yeah, and so by forcing other Executives managers Etc to start thinking about this, this could be the big one because speak, you know, it gets you into a brain space that did shift everyone's thinking to okay. This is a big problem. We have to take this extremely seriously and there's going to be big changes and moves that none of us are going to like but we have to do to ensure the survival of the business, you know, and maybe it's my you know, maybe I overreacted or I was overly paranoid but I do feel like it created a sense of urgency within the organization that hey this is a very big challenge for the company.

3 (6m 59s):
And so we need to be light on our feet. Everything's on the table all ideas need to be heard and vetted because this is a big problem for a business which the day Damage wasn't as bad as we feared. But you know that was a very big scary chapter for the company.

1 (7m 14s):
Yeah, and of course you had to have layoffs. I mean you I think playoffs for lowest pay cuts. I mean you basically had to implement all of these things and other things in order to keep things afloat.

3 (7m 26s):
Yeah, you know, that was one of the hardest personal things for me thinking about hey, we're entering into this pandemic. Advertising revenue is potentially evaporating, you know, if we can't sell any advertising we can't employ all of these salespeople. And so how do we how do we manage that? And how do we do? So in a way that cushions people as much as possible? How can we you know be empathetic and communicate clearly and be as generous as we can while still you know, keeping the company afloat. And so you're trying to balance all of these very difficult aspects as you're making these decisions that affect people's lives and It was brutal. It was brutal. The one thing that I feel a bit better about is as we were making these tough decisions for the company.

3 (8m 14s):
We were able to carve out a group and say, okay. Well some of these people that are trained that have been with us for years, like maybe we can put them on pause for a few months and bring them back. And so that was kind of the furlough decision and we took our best guess of how long how long can we put these people on pause and then Ford to bring them back back on and so it ended up being a thousand people that we put on furlough and we said at the outset. Hey this we think our best guess is is we think this is four months. Unfortunately that guess proved to be accurate and at the end of the four months we were able to start bringing people back, you know, the vast majority of them. I think something like 70 80 percent of them are back working at Yelp, which is fantastic.

3 (8m 58s):
We obviously that they made a huge sacrifice themselves not working for four months and That's difficult in and of itself but it does feel good that hey given this crazy natural disaster, right? We were able to take these people that are loyal to Yelp. You know that have been great to Yelp and bring them back on that feels good

1 (9m 17s):
Jimmy. I want to I want to kind of switch gears for a second ask you about about strategies resilience strategies. I mean, you mentioned earlier that with your team you said, hey all ideas are on the table and not presumably not just ideas to to staunch the bleeding to stop. The bleeding but also to think of new ways to build out Revenue right new ideas that could create new revenue streams. What are what are some things that you've started to do on the platform since the pandemic started that might actually redefine Yelp, you know in the future.

3 (9m 53s):
I mean, there's so much stuff related to obviously covid business data becomes so much more important. It was already hard to Corral things like, you know the hours of Business and consumers really value it and it changes and so it's hard to keep keep up to be up-to-date. We rely on the community as well as business owners to submit some of that stuff, but we really felt like we needed to turn it up a notch and so we now have you know ours that but there are also listed with when it was last updated so you can get a true sense of like, okay is this fresh kind of rely on this data. We've also done a lot of data Gathering ourselves. So for lots of popular businesses all over the country, we've been scrambling with our own personnel.

3 (10m 34s):
Try and make sure that the most important listings have the most accurate information. Also one of the things we heard from from both business owners and consumers is hey I care about my safety. I want to know before I go like, what is this business doing business owners that are trying to make their customers say for saying I want to be able to broadcast like what my Approach is employees are wearing masks or what have you and how do I put that out there for people to see so, you know, we have a whole section now dedicated to covid-19. T where businesses can publish the things that they're doing the future iteration of it that we're working on is actually allowing consumers also to provide some feedback on like yes, I'm seeing this and so really make sure that it's reliable robust information.

3 (11m 18s):
There's also things that are probably here to stay that are new for us like, you know virtual appointments. I mean Health Care has been transformed by video appointments. I've seen a doctor recently or oh yeah video and that was a great experience like, you know, so we are realizing that there are certain services. That we can experience at home that are local services, but you don't actually need to be in person and that's great. It's a time-saver its convenience etcetera.

1 (11m 41s):
Yeah, I notice that also you there's a new feature where black owned businesses can identify as black owned and that's really actually brought a lot of support to black-owned businesses in the wake of the of the demonstrations against racial Injustice. Do you anticipate the sort of more initiatives like that coming out of this? I mean, I'm assuming that that was unanticipated but that's seems like it's Been pretty

3 (12m 4s):
successful. Yeah, it has been a successful initiative very well received, you know in the wake of George Floyd's murder and the subsequent social unrest we launched into action both internally at Yalta understand what's going on. How do our black employees feel how's their work experience? But then also externally, what can we do to support, you know, black community members and black business owners and one of the things that we heard loud and clear was hey if I'm a black business owner and I want Tell people that I'm there and I want to be searchable and found as a black business owner, we should provide that we also pulled together of the businesses that identified we pulled together collections were able to promote those throughout the site and app.

3 (12m 47s):
We also just promoted, you know, being able to search across black-owned businesses and we actually saw a rise in searches for these businesses subsequently. So it's been a really great success story and more recently. We also did that for Latin X businesses and it's great, you know, For it's a great way to support communities that want to be seen and heard and deserve our support and so we're really proud

1 (13m 11s):
of that work. When we come back in just a moment. We'll talk about one of the features of Yelp that gets a lot of negative reviews and negative review stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor HubSpot Legacy CRM platforms have made you compromise for far too long with HubSpot CRM platform. You don't have to choose between Enterprise tools that are powerful or easy to use it gives you both. So your Marketing sales and service teams can align with he's accelerate sales and anticipate every customer need finally.

1 (13m 58s):
There's a CRM platform that helps you run better. So Can grow better without complexity ever getting in the way learn more at HubSpot.com and just one more thing the how I built this book is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with a ton of stories. You haven't heard and have some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect. It out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books and please if you support what I do on the show, you can show that support by picking up how I built this the book and thanks.

1 (14m 50s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition. If you spend any time on Yelp, you've probably had that confusing experience where you see a really negative and cutting review followed by a really positive one and they've been a lot of questions about how Yelp reviews actually work and if anyone is gaming the system, so I put some of those questions to Jeremy stoppelman. So Yelp has as you know, as long faced accusations of pay the play where essentially you know, You charge to keep up good reviews or high listings. Can you address that? Is that something that Yelp does can businesses pay to get better reviews placed higher.

1 (15m 31s):
What's your response to that?

3 (15m 32s):
The answer is of course absolutely not that's never been the case. And in fact, you can prove it to yourself look at any one of our advertisers and see if you find negative reviews chances are you will because everyone gets the occasional negative review and so if there was a delete negative review button that you could pay for presumably people would be Be using it. But yeah, I would say Yelp has been the canary in the coalmine on this misinformation issue, you know when it comes to sort of accusations that get spread through social media. This is something that you know, we've been dealing with for a decade. Obviously, there's lots of business owners out there and when some of them don't like their what they see on their Yelp page they come up with theories or reasons why you know, the Yelp rating doesn't mean anything to them why it doesn't matter and I can kind of understand that you have this rating out there that you can't control.

3 (16m 20s):
All which is by Design and you get frustrated with it. And so the natural thing is to say. Oh, well, I think it's pay-to-play or I heard it say that, you know this friend of mine told me that and so it's kind of this rumor mill thing that gets started spread on social media propagated repeated. Unfortunately in the media and then is seen to be well must be true because where there's smoke there's fire but it turns out you know courts have looked at it FTC is looked at it we've been tested in every which way and orifice possible at this point. Point and the reality is we don't ya we try to be a fair referee and create a Level Playing Field and I think we do a good job of that which is why we get the criticism because it turns out you know, if you let your guard down like some of our competitors Google for instance doesn't take as harsh as stance on, you know, allowing people to solicit reviews or fake reviews or what have you liked ratings tend to be more positive and business owners love that.

3 (17m 14s):
But guess what that's not great for your pocketbook as a consumer and so we're trying to strike the right balance between business. Consumers

1 (17m 20s):
a lot of questions also about negative reviews some people, you know saying look there tool for people who want to hurt businesses for one reason or another is why isn't there a mechanism to hold reviewers accountable to say Hey, you know because I can point to thousands of examples you've heard them of restaurants getting pummeled by people who don't like them because of a political stance. They took for example, the Red Hen Restaurant that didn't serve Sarah Huckabee Sanders got pummeled by people who gave it. It one star reviews. Is there a mechanism that could be created to hold reviewers accountable so they can't manipulate the reviews like that.

3 (17m 57s):
Well, I think we're talking about two different things. They're they're sort of like Yelp becoming a bit of a political or other review sites becoming a bit of a political platform when there's some sort of political Scandal associate with business or other Scandal and that we have a separate mechanism for dealing with we can put up an alert on the page and we actually pull down the content that's unrelated to the actual business. We do, you know. Try to point to what's happening in the media. So people have the context of what's going on with the

1 (18m 24s):
season and somebody were to like write a review about the restaurant just a negative review that's just made up because they don't like the business owner. I mean isn't there is there a way to hold that reviewer accountable or at least make sure that their identity is clear to maybe to prevent that are there ways to prevent that or is it just

3 (18m 44s):
something we do we do have very aggressive mechanisms to try to create a Level Playing Field and I guess stepping back for a a second. It's important to remember that 80% of the reviews on Yelp or three stars in them. So there is a you know, and I get it like I as a business owner, you know, I also get negative feedback whether through the media or other places like I'm not immune to it it stings you remember it for years. Like I'm bitter about many stories years. I could name the reporters, but you have to you know, you have to remind yourself. It's the big picture that counts no one's going to have a perfect record. And it turns out actually the occasional negative just shows that you are a real person that things go wrong or there's also crazy customers that does exist.

3 (19m 29s):
But Yelp has a mechanism or 25% on average of reviews are not shown on the businesses page and we are by far the most aggressive of any review site out there. And the reason why we do that is for there are few but one is obviously business owners try to game the system. It does happen all the time whether it's writing fake reviews for Ourselves emailing their Uncle saying review me what have you but then also for consumers sometimes there might be a malicious, you know could be a competitor that's driving by on your page and writing a negative review or it could just be you know, random person that helped write trust for one reason or another and so we set aside 25 percent of the content on Yelp, which is impressive.

3 (20m 10s):
It hurts the site like from a business standpoint because we have less content business owners that have reviews, you know, it's better for business frankly. But we do that because we truly care about making sure that Yelp is a useful service. That is the service that consumers can rely on which means there is going to be negative content and they're not going to look at that one review and say, oh I'm not buying this because this to you look at that one negative review and say that's it. I'm done.

1 (20m 38s):
No, I don't I don't but you know, we're living at I'm with so much misinformation and disinformation. It's hard to know it with someone on Twitter's or Russian bot or You know like some kind of troll farm and in Eastern Europe Ukraine is just impossible to know and it is the same with with with with sort of anonymous reviews. I guess. I wonder whether there are there are mechanisms are there ways to if we assume that let's say 10% or 5% of people who are doing this are just trolls. Is there technology to To root them out.

3 (21m 18s):
I definitely in the in the case of bots malicious spam things like that. Yeah. Absolutely. There's like that's part of the 25% that we take off of the page is, you know, we are using software algorithms to identify suspicious patterns and things that you know things that we don't want to show consumers. So we do take it. Absolutely. Seriously. I mean, I think of your earlier comment there was maybe an insinuation that you know, is there a way to prove that the person transacted and there is like false. I would call it very phone. If that if you prove that someone transacted then that review is therefore trustworthy. But all you have to do is like read one of the 20 stories on Amazon about how people still easily gain that system because like you could send the product to someone reimburse them for buying it and then they write a fake review for you and now consumers are misled.

3 (22m 4s):
So it's very easy even in a transactional system if the incentives are there because ultimately like people want to sell more product or right, you know, it's like there's there's still very there's a lot of money in gaming the system. Mmm, and so it's a tool but it's not a golden Bullet by any means and there's plenty of examples where the site I personally can't rely. I don't rely at all on Amazon reviews because I don't think they take the system very seriously. I think they use it as a way to just sell stuff but you know personally I go to wire cutter which is the brand of the New York Times for all my consumer product

1 (22m 36s):
purchases. All right. I'm going to ask this one last question for Tron Kim's for coming from YouTube trying ask some what tools do you have for businesses to fight back? Fake reviews are reviews that they think are were planted by a competitor or something like that

3 (22m 51s):
do have flagging so if you log into your business business owners owner dashboard based on yelp.com, you can go in there and Mark a review as suspicious or give us some context around it. We do have a human staff as well in addition to all the algorithms and whatnot. That will take a look reviews. Also you can respond and that's one of the most powerful tools I think out there because think about yourself as a customer if you see a negative review you might read that and say oh, that's weird. Weird, but then if you see a very thoughtful reply from the business owner a personal like empathetic. Hey, I'm sorry it went this way. You know when you came into my restaurant, please, you know, ask for me by name. I want to you know, stop by and thank you for your busy. It's like that type of communication can completely neutralize a situation that was bad or even if you aren't familiar with that particular customer just treating it seriously showing that you care.

3 (23m 40s):
I think goes a long way for that next customer that's going to look at your business page

1 (23m 44s):
and I look at those all the time. I love when when business owners respond to reviews. I think it's really great. I want to ask you about to put your entrepreneurs head on because we have a lot of people watching who are entrepreneurs who've got ya small small businesses and are really looking for ideas. We mentioned that when you launch the output and get a whole lot of traction and it was really I mean, I think you described as like this dark period you were worried you were just like driving your team off a cliff. I think those are the words you use right now. It's a pretty dark period for a lot of Businesses, what advice do you have for people who might feel like they're leading their teams off a cliff right now. I mean, what would you say to them?

3 (24m 23s):
I mean II in crisis the number one thing I think is staying calm and just one foot in front of the other. You know, there was a important lesson. I remember from my PayPal days. We were up late I was with the team and we had like a bad code push and the site wouldn't come back up. So PayPal was basically down initially down on purpose. But we couldn't get the site back up and it was like stretching on hours and hours. We had this very senior database administrator who kind of battle-hardened he had seen it all and I was literally in a panic. I'm like, oh my God. Oh my God. What are we gonna do that? Like I was it's full-on panic and the guy was just so calm and collected and like no-nonsense and we're going to try this and we're going to try that and it was a that was an important lesson for me no matter how crazy things get like there is zero benefit.

3 (25m 15s):
It to being in panic mode and the absolute best thing you can do is try to calm yourself down take a moment think about things and figure out what is one thing you can do right now and I was leaning on that very much. So, you know, yeah, it's March April

1 (25m 29s):
Jeremy last question for you. When you when we're done with this pandemic, hopefully and and we can return to something that is normal. It's gonna be different but normal what what do you want to take with you from this time? What that you've learned about yourself as a leader that you will take with you into the future and I to how you how you operate as a

3 (25m 48s):
leader? I think communication is the key. You know, I don't think there is enough communication that I could do to help right now. I just think there's a lot of anxiety. There's a lot of uncertainty both because the business but even more so, you know in our society and politics obviously and so the more that you can project that it's for calm confidence, you know, we're going to get through this one foot in front of the other. Here's the actions that we're taking here's What we know right now. I think the better people feel and the more people can say Focus, you know on our shared Mission and so that's that's probably my best I could take away is like you've never done enough communication within your organization.

3 (26m 29s):
So keep reminding people what they're up to why they're doing it and that you're there to support them

1 (26m 34s):
Jeremy stoppelman founder and CEO of Yelp. Thank you so much for joining us. Thank you. That's an excerpt from my conversation with Jeremy stoppelman the founder and CEO of Help to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com and you can learn more about the resilient series are other virtual NPR events by going to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by JC Howard with help from Canada slim. Will Mitchell Bruce Grant Matt Adams L. Mannion Gianna cappadonna, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers are in turn is Sfera Safari.

1 (27m 16s):
Thanks for listening stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.