2 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, I just want to tell you about the how I built this book. It's coming out in just a few weeks. But if you preorder before September 30th, I will send you a signed book plate for free. If you love this show if you love the stories you hear on it, if you're inspired by them, if you're looking to start a new business or just thinking about it. Well, you may want to check out the how I built this book. It's full of inspiration ideas stories and insights pre-order. Your copy of how I built this by visiting Gyros.com or how I built this.com for more details.

2 (40s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're thinking creatively during this disruptive time. And today we're going to hear from the cofounders of Wayfarer near a gunshot and Steve conine. We first feature neeraj and Steve on the show in April of 2018 and we just republish that episode. So it's near the top of your podcast Q. You should check it out. They have an amazing story anyway since We talk to them in 2018 Wayfarer has become profitable and despite anticipating huge challenges during this economic crisis Wayfarer is actually done pretty well as people start to beef up their home offices.

2 (1m 25s):
I spoke with neeraj and Steve about Wayfarers unexpected success during this economic crisis and how that's changed their business practices. Let's start by taking us back to sort of March. How did you begin to plan for presumably the The worst at that point what were some of the steps you took the

1 (1m 42s):
urge? Yeah, so obviously when covid started there's a whole lot of uncertainty. We kind of decided a few things one was how do we keep our supply chain up and running so we can take care of our customers and so we implemented a lot of safety protocols that actually worked out very well because we were able to keep running and keep everyone healthy and safe. Second thing is from a liquidity standpoint. We didn't know what was going to happen next. So we actually decided to raise money. So we raised 535 million dollars in hindsight. We didn't need but at the time you don't Exactly know what's going to happen. And so we did that and we did that very quickly over a two-week period and so I think that put us in a great position and then you know, we had a big scramble to get everyone productively working from home who was involved with the supply chain. And so well over 3,000 people in customer service and our whole corporate team and and so there was kind of like a bit of a kind of mad - in the beginning to get everything well situated, but we have a great team and they really rallied and didn't have fantastic

2 (2m 35s):
job. It sounds like you had anticipated that you were going to face a serious load. Down and that's why you raise the cash to presumably to help you through what you anticipated was going to be a slow down. Well,

1 (2m 47s):
our worry was actually, you know, we didn't even know what the governmental regulations were going to be my perhaps we would be shut down, you know, we didn't actually know governments and what was essential what was not essential there's a question at some points about perhaps that the carrier networks will only carry certain types of packages not other types of packages and we know so we didn't have a answer but we had uncertainty and so we reacted to that and then the notion of a Slowdown certainly was on Mine's obviously what's happened is quite different but more of a boom, but we didn't know that at the

2 (3m 14s):
time before we talk about what's happened. What were you able to do to keep Warehouse employees safe? Because you got warehouses all over the country. How do people stay safe in those

1 (3m 24s):
environments? We did a few things. So we we change the scheduling of how shifts works that shifts didn't overlap and we went two more shifts per week so that we were able to basically take care of the volume without having to have folks in a situation where they're overlapping other shifts then within the ship. We put in place temperature checks. We actually made a lot of the walking paths One Way aisles that we actually were able to support social distancing in the buildings. And then we also increase the cleaning protocols. We actually raise the rate of pay we did a lot of things to support the families of the folks who are working. For example, we put in place a dinners to go program twice a week everyone who worked in one of our buildings just taking home a family meal for their whole family. And so and that helped the local independent restaurants who are popular restaurants next to our locations continue to have volumes.

1 (4m 10s):
Kind of did a variety of things some things helping the community some things helping our team some things about health and

2 (4m 15s):
safety, you know is interesting in March a lot of businesses really saw a steep decline in Revenue. I assume that maybe happened to you too. But pretty soon after sales just not only picked up a dramatically picked up

1 (4m 29s):
right what happened in mid-march. So from basically March 15th through the end of March, we actually saw sales rise, but they Rose in very specific categories, so things like refrigerators and Freezers kitchen cooking utensils and pots and pans home office desks and children's playroom and children's furniture and then outdoor recreation, you know trampoline swing set. So very specific categories that you could easily attribute to the immediate sort of stay-at-home type situation that had transpired. So even though it's a rose. We didn't know what was going to happen after that. But to your point what happened next is more. Hey folks are at home. They're not traveling. They're not going out for entertainment and every customer has List of things they want to do to improve their home and we work across all those different categories.

1 (5m 14s):
And so they were there was basically all of a sudden people start tackling those items off their

2 (5m 18s):
list mean your court your second quarter of this year was the first time you got to profitability. I mean your your stock price over the last year's also dramatically increase, I mean in a way, it seems counterintuitive right that so many of us assume that the retail sector in its entirety would be really crushed. I mean did either of you ever think that that was going to happen to Wayfarer guy, you know, Very

1 (5m 40s):
interesting in March. I mean, I think we were definitely as leadership and as a company worried about the business it was this a real sort of experience to go from feeling like we have to worry about this thing going to 0-2. Oh my gosh real one of the beneficiaries. So what's a responsibility there? How do we help support? You know the team how do we support their family? How do we support the local communities? How do we make sure that we're giving back and quickly you start to realize why you're having success because obviously everyone's in their homes. They're spending on their homes. They're thinking about their homes their traveled by It's are no longer there. And so they have discretionary money to spend and then obviously the government stimulus comes along and that's you know, another positive impact to Consumers wallets, and it's been fascinating. And as you said we went from pretty normal Runway to basically all of a sudden you're running at these Pete promotional day levels day in and day in and day in and you're kind of not sure if you can keep up with it.

1 (6m 30s):
If you can handle it, you know, if the team is going to be able to function well and so you're navigating and kind of you know, whatever a daily basis. I mean that kind of helped us all gel. I think as we want work from home because it was We much faced with you know, pretty intense period of

2 (6m 43s):
effort I want to ask you about the long-term strategy you guys had because essentially you are not profitable until this latest quarter in large part from what I understand because you were spending a lot of money building up Logistics and technology, which I guess paid off at this moment. Yes, it's funny

1 (7m 2s):
how the timing lines up because we built the company by bootstrapping so we were profitable for the first decade plus the business, but then when we raised Need to build up the Wayfarer brand then we're losing money and we were then fairly shortly after that presented with two really big opportunities one was replicating the business model in Europe. And the other one was building out the logistics Network and those two are investments that we make lots of different Investments, but most Investments we make in our five million or 10 million or 20 million dollars a year the magnitude of international and Logistics were massive. And so we've been losing a lot of money when you look back over the last few years really building out those two capabilities. And one of the things that we had announced at the end of last year was that we were now at a scale at a point where we could actually be profitable and continue investing because we've gotten up to over 10 billion in revenue.

1 (7m 52s):
And so just the contribution margin that generated was now enough to both fund Investments and be profitable but what's ironic is all of a sudden is covid hit rather than us, you know, we said a 20 percent growth would be profitable all of a sudden the growth came in at 84% and we were massively profitable. So those two Trends ended up sitting, you know, basically on

2 (8m 10s):
Above each other. Yeah, I mean have there been any supply chain issues at all? And in terms of keeping up with customer demand

1 (8m 15s):
significant significant. I mean as you can imagine when demand grows that fast, you know everything from the carrier capacity to do the deliveries to on our team our customer service team did an amazing job of rallying to handle the volume because frankly, you know, we have the same number of customer service folks the day before or the day after but the volumes grown dramatically and as you can imagine the delays in the carrier networks, just create even more calls. So there's a lot of challenges and then I Mentioned in the beginning part trampoline swing sets were examples and freezers of categories that took off early. Well within a few weeks, they're sold out Nationwide. And so now you have months where you have short supplies. So there's a lot of supply chain challenges. And so we started working on that right away. So that as you go through the week's go by all the sudden you do see out of stock rates recovering you do see Transportation get better, but it doesn't happen overnight.

1 (9m 2s):
So you have a tea Master Ali through a really tough

2 (9m 4s):
period it's a little bit of a kind of an odd position to be in right because on the one hand, of course, it's great your business is In great in the midst of a general economic crisis. So I mean this is something a little bit of weird about that that you just kind of have to navigate in your own

1 (9m 19s):
mind. Yeah. Yes there definitely is. I mean, I think you don't want to be seen as you know a group that's like taking advantage of a situation that's sort of an out of your control. And so, you know, I think giving back to the community and the meal program nerds is talked and some of the program's we've done to really support employee giving employees donating their time. We're things we got right on and you know, we continue to make sure that you know, we're encouraging the team pushing and talking about what we can do to help support the communities. I think that worked out pretty well. Our team just has so much empathy whether it be for the customers or the communities were in that the immediate reaction. Everyone had was about how can we help and so that was uneven unrelated the fact that we're doing well and because we're doing what we're able to do even more so we were able to raise millions of dollars for a couple Global covid relief charities.

1 (10m 10s):
Our employees actually donated a lot of money to covid relief charity. So there was a lot of things that we were able to jump into just because of the ethos of the team we have and I think that certainly frankly not just doing those things but doing them very early on I think helped a lot because I think as time went by, you know, governments and other started helping do a lot but I think the very beginning we felt like we were able to help make a difference

2 (10m 30s):
what happens if the housing market starts to soften and with a softening housing market, you know, you could have a softening Furniture Market potentially. Are you prepared for that possibility

1 (10m 41s):
depending on what number you want to take the Run rate of you know, we're 13 14 15 billion dollars in annual revenue, but that compares to an end Market that's 800 billion dollars. So we're still less than 2% of the N Market in 2007 to 2010 during the financial crisis. That was the worst time for the furniture industry since the Great Depression and the Great Depression. It shrunk 35% from the top to the bottom in the financial crisis actually Shrunk the furniture industry shrunk by 30% 3 0 and so Really devastating was interesting though is online except for an immediate shock at the very beginning online actually grew through it. And the reason is customers who maybe weren't as keen on buying online all of a sudden were more curious about value more curious about availability, you know, we don't root for a bad economy, but I think we will be able to do well and we have great relations with our suppliers and because we're sort of their ability to go to market and reach those customers, they basically lean in and periods of disruption even more than they will on a normal Just so you know, the other thing is I do think this period of time is showed us that even though you're big you can still change quickly.

1 (11m 45s):
And so I think we have a team that can react dynamically and we have a very entrepreneurial culture still and I think Innovation favors entrepreneurs during a time of change and so I think those are both sort of been a reaffirmation of like we have a great team we can navigate this stuff and so uncertainty. It's something that we do. Well, is it coming navigating regardless kind of what the future looks

2 (12m 5s):
like that last question I ask you about anticipating downturns. I it was a question we got from You can rolling so Meghan, thank you for that question a couple questions about the environment. We have question from Elizabeth Leonard from Stephanie Moran. What are your plans to make your company more environmentally friendly a lot of questions about the so-called fast furniture business and its impact on the environment. Not only the producing Furniture in mass quantities, but shipping it across the world. So can you talk about that? I mean, there's no question that the industry you're in does have a significant impact on the

1 (12m 38s):
environment. Absolutely. Lee a lot of what we're doing is we're on streamlining the supply chain so actually if you look at how it works today, it's highly inefficient where effectively goods are shipped through multiple destination points customers are then driving to a store there then navigating the store then they're buying something that items then put out for delivery later and often has to Transit a long way because a lot of these goods are the becoming special order type items that have to go travel again from a different destination. We move the items in bulk very efficiently very close to the End customer. We then deliver. Directly to them we are able to take out a lot of the transportation legs which have the benefit both from an environmental standpoint from a cost standpoint and improve the speed of delivery.

1 (13m 19s):
And so we're actually trying to do a lot to do that. And then that's separate from all the things we're trying to do around waste materials and how we can use more recycled materials. The thing I would add to is just you know, Wayfarers kind of it's a platform for literally tens of thousands of entrepreneurs who make products there is definitely a very keen eye to this topic that a lot of the furniture manufacturers care deeply about and we're really trying to help surface that so that you know as consumer demand preferences ship they can be very aware of who they're buying from and what the products are and so, you know, really trying to surface the stories of our suppliers. There's some amazing people in our supply chain doing some really great things around sustainability around better, you know manufacturing infestation practices. We know they care about it and we are team cares about it a lot as well.

2 (14m 1s):
When we come back in just a moment near urgent Steve talk about their role as a national brand with a platform and what they hope to take away from this moment. Time stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from

1 (14m 16s):
NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more

2 (14m 31s):
at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So last month Wayfarer was the target of a false conspiracy theory which was debunked immediately, but still pretty troubling for everyone involved especially neeraj and Steve. I want to shift gears a little bit and talk about two challenges that you faced and one is surfaced recently this summer and I hesitate to ask about it because I don't even want to I don't even want to shed any light on it because it's so disturbing and distressing, but there is a Conspiracy theory movement in the United States and this movement this summer began to spread a conspiracy about Wayfarer products Hiding Children in them trafficking children in them.

2 (15m 22s):
I think they were these large industrial sized cabinets. It's something that is so disturbing and distressing that it's not even funny. How did you respond to it? I mean, I'm sure your initial response is like oh this is nonsense, but but it actually you had to really Spawn to it. What did you

1 (15m 40s):
do? Well, you know say you never want to be the target of a faceless conspiracy theory that is effectively engineered and spread by folks who are very Adept at social media on and that that is in fact what happened? I think the real damage ends up being caused to the actual real victims of the victims of child trafficking who basically the hotlines where they can get help or overrun with calls from folks who are basically tying up that bandwidth just with non-content. What we did is You know frankly just be honest and forthright and basically, you know point to the fact that it was baseless and it with a very basic amount of Investigation. You can prove that it's baseless and what we saw it took a couple days, but then you see credible news sources, whether it's the Associated Press or Reuters or the New York Times web come out and basically debunk it point out that there's no content there and basically also kind of highlight the forces that are at work that are causing some of these things to happen and spread.

1 (16m 38s):
I think it's a challenge because I don't think the average person's necessarily as keenly aware of what happens on social media and what perhaps is rooted in fact and what isn't and how to discern one from the other so I think it is a challenge we have in our

2 (16m 49s):
times. I mean, is this the new normal Steve? I mean our companies and businesses going to have to prepare to contend with these insane conspiracy theories. I mean is is this par for the course now,

1 (16m 60s):
you know when we started this business the thought of saying hey, you know, we're trying to build a beloved brand for home decor and furniture and more and you're going to get pulled into things like Sir targeted for various things. There's part of me wonders if you're building a great brand is this just part of the journey and if you look back at other great brands have been going to us over the years. They certainly go through periods of good, press Brad, press different things, right? We are certainly in a period today where these things can be Amplified quicker than they ever have been and so there's a concern I have there and there's a concern of how long does it take us as a civilization really starts to digest how these new channels of communication should be handled and we're certainly in the middle of that. And so I think yeah, I mean anyone who's Building a big brand is going to have to be aware that their brains when we used to amplify messages and that is going to be something have to contend with and think about learn how to navigate.

1 (17m 48s):
It's been fascinating for us to learn how to navigate that and figure it

2 (17m 51s):
out. Let me ask you about something of is not a conspiracy theory something that happened last year when hundreds of Wayfarer employees walked off the job. They were protesting against some furniture that was sold to detention center in Texas that was intended for migrant children and you had to deal with this. I mean you had employees who are making demands Of the two of you they were saying we demand our company be better. So how did that affect the way you think of leadership and the way that you run the company in the first of all when this came to your attention, what did you

1 (18m 22s):
do? You know that was it was a fishing pier to navigate. I think the core thing we really did and of course thing that led to his better communication with the team, you know, we have a very thoughtful team and we have a huge diversity of viewpoints inside organization as well looking back on that period we Did a much better job of figuring out okay issues that people care deeply about how do we raise them in a way where we can actually have a constructive outcome and we can have a dialogue about it and can make changes at the team feels feels good about and so coming out of that when we created an orders perspective group, and we've really did a lot of soul-searching as a company to really think about. Okay, how do we think about who do we sell to how do we you know, you don't want to get in the business of judging the morality of your customers necessarily but there's clearly lines that you want to hold firm on as a company.

1 (19m 6s):
And so, you know that spurred some really good dialogue. Inside our organization that has made us a lot more thoughtful about how we communicate and how we make change inside, you know the company and talk to each other about it, you know, and that was not a conspiracy theory, but it does also kind of point out that you know Stories the way information spreads is not always accurate. It is actually mattresses sold to a non-profit 501 c 3 that operates Refugee shelters all over the world and Africa and the United States and Europe and they were actually operating three shelters along the southern border, but But the point I would make actually is what Steve said by tightening the communication with our broad team. It really really helped and so we now have a group that basically internally helps also try to provide proactive thoughts on things we can do and one of the things that came out of that.

1 (19m 53s):
We actually encourage we should Jesus really important everyone votes and one of the causes we really even pushing is just that everyone should take the time to vote whether it's a local election, whether it's a national election, whether it's a primary and it makes a difference because your If everyone voted, you know, we would get broad outcomes that maybe not everyone be happy with that. They would reflect everybody. But when only a small portion of people vote you don't necessarily get that broad-based outcome. And so one of the things we did is we basically said on official election days and each geography. We're going to arrange for everyone to have time off so that they can vote while that might be easy for someone who you know is a software engineer has a lot of latitude in their schedule might not be easy for maybe someone who's working one of our warehouses or on a fixed shift and customer service.

1 (20m 37s):
So we said well we're going to figure out How to handle it so that shift wise would paid time off everyone can actually go vote we signed a petition and hopefully a lot of companies take that approach of kind of saying hey it's not required that you do that but why not do it, you know, and so I think there's good ideas that we really as a team. We want to be one of those companies that can help make a

2 (20m 54s):
difference, you know near Jason and Steve. I mean for a long time big companies and their leaders really kind of shied away from taking political and social stances because I don't want to set their customers, but that's changing. I mean you look at PayPal for example, they D platform. Do you know hate groups from there? But they don't allow conspiracy theorist to use PayPal Etc. There are other companies that are really taking a stand and when it comes to taking a stand on certain issues that you believe in. Is there an argument to be made that you should be doing that?

1 (21m 23s):
I think it's important to take a stand on issues you believe in and there's certain things like I'm on the topic of racism and actually being proactively, you know, fighting against racism and making sure that we're rooting out unconscious bias. That's something we've been very proactive on and we believe in very significantly there. Other opinions that I have personally that I don't know that the company should take a stand on because frankly there's two sides to a lot of topics that in our mind there is not just one side that reflects everyone's reasonable views. And so one of the things that's interesting is you mentioned our customers have a broad range of views. Well our employees do too and so what we did with this group is we actually a master group that actually broad-based across our Workforce. And so what's interesting is then it becomes really clear on the broad things.

1 (22m 3s):
Everyone does agree on and these are things that we feel like we should go actively push and the example voting is one. Sample of that and there's many others and then there's other things that the group would not all agree on but they would then through that course realize that it's reasonable that people could have other opinions and on those things. We don't necessarily feel like the company should go and take one perspective. And so there's a balance I think between these two different types of

2 (22m 25s):
issue, you know, one of the themes that we hit on in our original podcast episode was this idea that the product doesn't always have to drive the founders, but that the challenge should drive the founder. So you guys were not that passionate about furniture Euro home decor you said that on the show, but you were really motivated by solving the problem of how to get you know, people access to a wide selection of these products that were available in big cities, but to make them available to people all over all over the place. I mean, that's really what motivated you do you have any advice for people watching who are thinking about starting something now and how to seek out the right business opportunities for them. The thing I would

1 (23m 3s):
say to entrepreneurs right now is that there are a lot of very traditional things that people you may love like maybe Love for ensuring, you know, where honestly I did the street. Maybe you love cars. Maybe you love racing maybe love biking. Maybe you'll whatever it is. I think we are two point inflection right now where you could likely start a restaurant today and do very well with it because you're going to be forced to operate within the constraints of today and they're very different than a lot of your competitive set is and so if you love cooking now could be a great time to actually go to that industry, even though on the surface. It seems like it could be a terrible time same thing with a lot of the different industries that are under stress. I think, you know an entrepreneur as a lot of times get Mired in trying to come up with a great big new idea and missing that actually their hard work and effort on something that that is kind of in front of them can often times make the biggest difference and can really leads to success.

1 (23m 49s):
I would just say two things. So I do think you need to be excited about the idea you're pursue. So even though we didn't start our entrepreneurial Journey, which is this company by saying, oh we want to do something in home and furniture and decor we did get excited about the ideas. I think you need to be truly excited about the idea. And then the second point is just simply that the right time to start something. Often the time that seems at least obvious. So for example, we started this business which is an e-commerce business in 2002, right after the.com crash right after e-commerce was viewed as a bit of a Fool's errand by a lot of folks, but we believe that that wasn't true we found data that supported our view and we thought in fact there was a real opportunity. Well, if you look back on that what happens is less companies get started pursuing that opportunity during a time when it's viewed as out of fashion or a bit unwise or risky then we'll in a good time.

1 (24m 38s):
And so so innately you basically both build better muscles dealing with that adversity and frankly you have less competition. And so I would encourage folks to not worry about the macro factors instead worry about you know, is there something they're excited about that makes sense and if there is then that can in fact be a great idea and a great

2 (24m 54s):
time how have you kept your partnership? So strong over all these years. What have you guys been able to do that has worked so well, is it about strictly demarcating? Who does what? How do you explain

1 (25m 6s):
it? I'd actually say it's a bit the opposite so And a demarcated who does what didn't work quite as well. We kind of took a shot at that within a few months of the very first business. We started we found that we gravitated to doing different things that we each both enjoyed and were better at but we got lucky those things happen to be highly complementary and so on one hand, we really appreciate each other's advice and business judgment and so in that sense really were good partners, but at the same time, we actually enjoyed working on different areas of the business. I think it's tough if either you don't trust each other's judgment and want to listen Either one or if you're both drawn to the same stuff and don't want to do the other stuff. I think those are two common failings and we were lucky not to have either of those two.

1 (25m 46s):
I would just add. Yeah, we've done a good job of communication and I think any relationship communication matters a lot and we both got very good early on being very blunt and not taking it personally with each other. And then the other thing is I would say we both have been very non-judgmental of the other one. So in other words near says interest that I'm kind of I don't have his the interest in but at the same time when I see him choosing Do it. I'm supportive and excited about it. And I'm not sort of like, oh, why are you doing that? And you know, we've just developed a don't know a healthy relationship through the those years of interaction and kind of having different skills and different interests that I'm sleep are dwell in business because you tend to cover a lot more topic areas that matter to the success of the overall organization in five

2 (26m 27s):
years from now when you look back what do you want to take with you from this time into the future? What are some of the things that you've actually done better that you want to make a permanent part of Wafers

1 (26m 37s):
culture. What? The things I would say just you know in the beginning it was unnatural but it sort of felt like it really important to communicate a lot broadly to the team. Just knowing that the uncertainty even though you didn't necessarily have answers they had questions and so trying to do your best to help them understand how you were thinking about things and what you saw was happening and just seeing how valuable that is. I think there's always an ongoing under appreciation of the value of communication. And so the questions like how do you keep up that higher Cadence of communication? Just knowing how much energy it takes and how do you do in a productive way and I think that's something we continue to get better at that. I think helps us be a really tight-knit team that we're certainly working on. Yeah, the one thing I would add to that and it's just I think there's a certain like intimacy of life or like realism of life that this period has brought into business maybe more than it would have historically where you're just forced to have more of a recognition of people's complexity of life and whether that's kids at home or the work setup you have or its distractions you have during the day those have been really brought into I think the interactions in the office plays a lot more than they ever have.

1 (27m 38s):
Have and I think that's a healthy thing and that we shouldn't lose that as we go back to more Blended, you know interaction environment. I find that hopefully will be helpful to overall work-life balance is for

2 (27m 48s):
people to keep conine here - aw. Thank you so much. Co-founders Wayfarer. Thank you.

1 (27m 52s):
Thank you guys. Thanks guy.

2 (27m 54s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with neeraj Shaw and Steve Kona and the cofounders of Wayfarer to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com Cam / NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Matt Adams Gianna cappadonna, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.