3 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more.

2 (15s):
Hello everyone and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes as you know, we're talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're thinking creatively and doing the work differently right now. And today we're going to hear from um to Executives at hello sunshine CEO, Sarah hardened and Laura neustadter head of TV and film hello sunshine is a production company whose mission is to highlight female lead films TV shows and books. It was founded four years ago by actor Reese Witherspoon, and it's already a big name in Hollywood. In fact hours before we went live the television Academy announced this year's Emmy nominations and hello sunshine did pretty well.

2 (1m 0s):
Ripped from the headlines breaking news 18 any nominations this morning. This shows include little fires everywhere the morning show big little lies. Lauren Sarah. Welcome.

3 (1m 12s):
Good morning. Good morning. Congratulations 18 Emmy nominations. Thank you were so excited. It

2 (1m 19s):
was a great day. Yeah. So first of all for people who don't know about the production company tell us about hello sunshine a little bit more

1 (1m 25s):
about it. Well, look, I think you know, the company was founded with a driving Mission and really again, Gap in the marketplace that resole which was to put women at the center of these stories and I think when we started the company, we sort of embrace the complexity of wanting to do that in storytelling format. And you know with Reese has become particularly, you know brace is a huge reader. She's raised all the book picks and we love elevating female narratives from books and in other

2 (1m 53s):
ways as well. Everything's pain puss in Hollywood right now films TV just are not happening. It's not safe presuming that Case with your Productions, right? You're not filming anything right now.

3 (2m 3s):
That's correct. We had just started shooting our second season of The Morning Show and we were meant to have a show start production for Amazon to show called Daisy Jones in the six was going to start in April and then we had another show for Netflix called from scratch that would have been starting this month and we have paused everything and we are deep in figuring out how and when we can come back for each of those shows. But I will say, you know, we've used the time in inspiring and extraordinary ways. I think we were dealt a very specific hand. Unfortunately. You can't congregate with large groups of people on a set on a soundstage anymore.

3 (2m 45s):
So what we really did was we took the opportunity to connect with our team internally and also with the people that we create with and we've really I think planted some wonderful seeds of development that will hopefully grow Years to come and in truth if we have been in production on the three shows and the movie that we thought we were going to be in production on we might not have had time to build out the development slate in quite the way that we have. So I think that there has been a silver lining but I will say we are all more than eager to get back into production and we are spending our days figuring out how to do it safely.

2 (3m 21s):
Well, let me ask you specifically but the morning show I mean that was season one. I mean, how are you going to finish these into because I'm assuming it's not all filmed

3 (3m 29s):
right it is Not all filmed. We are figuring it out right now. We are talking to epidemiologists to help and safety experts. We've got a covid coordinator. We have a world-class team that is working with us to figure out every single day. What do we do? We've had our epidemiologist came and looked at our sound stages and you know the ventilation and figuring out, you know, obviously there have been all of these white papers that have come out that talk about what is required in terms of health and safety. And thankfully each of the studios that are producing. These shows also are doing their own sort of covid Bible as it were talking about all the precautions that they're going to be taking and look people are taking this incredibly seriously health and safety is the most important thing and in a very inspiring way.

3 (4m 19s):
I think companies are working together to share, you know information and ways that they can innovate together to get Productions back on their feet quickly and look, I mean there's Our shows that are going to be going back in August from what I hear. So I think we're well on our

1 (4m 35s):
way. Is there a world Lauren where

2 (4m 38s):
there's like like how the NBA is doing a bubble? Right? Everyone's in Orlando playing basketball and staying in that bubble. Is there a world where like Jennifer Aniston and Reese Witherspoon and Steve Carell and all these actors are in a bubble for like six weeks to finish

3 (4m 53s):
filming. Well, our shoot is more like six months for a Seasons. So it's a longer. It's a long one. Brett and I think though we aren't right now talking about going into a bubble quote-unquote. I do think what we're talking about is how to be as safe as possible. And obviously, you know, when you go into these into these production papers were creating zones so that only the very most essential people would actually be on set so that we will be reducing risk and everyone will be, you know, honoring everything around social distancing and people making sure that they are appropriately We covered and that you know that everyone is taking all precautions.

3 (5m 34s):
I think there are lots of conversations being happened but not ones to answer your question. Not one's about a bubble in the way that the NBA is though. I think that people are talking about that when they think about shooting out of state.

2 (5m 46s):
Yeah, we had Jeremy Zimmer on here a couple days ago the head of United talent agency. And basically he said like four to six months. We're going to start to see a shortage of new TV. What do you think about that? I mean, is that a possibility?

3 (5m 60s):
I definitely think that's a possibility. I mean, I think it just depends on how much people have in their coffers and how where they are in posts and what they're planning in terms. I'm sure that people are being very deliberate about their release schedules. But yes, I mean obviously it's been it's been quite a long time since we've been able to be on a set and so, you know, if they don't have it on film it's very hard to cut it and and present it to an audience. It's going to say I think

1 (6m 25s):
what's also interesting is you look at, you know, I think when we talk about Abby. Big crude complex scripted shoots and then you look at you know, you look at the unscripted business where certain formats are able to shoot with with a much lower for I think the question really think some of it right like as some of those bigger shoots get delayed or they have big set pieces or big crowd scenes how you were both innovating on the format to those scripted shows. But then also as you cook what is it open up and opportunities for unscripted programming and other types of formats that Follower and set for shooting footprint as well.

2 (7m 3s):
This must be so weird, you know, I mean, it's like it's like time has frozen in Hollywood right now in a sense,

3 (7m 9s):
right? It is definitely weird. I will be honest. It does feel like things are a bit Frozen, but I actually think things are also thawing I think this is an opportunity to slow down and to connect in ways that maybe we weren't slowing down and making time to connect. Checked before I think that is the case internally at hello sunshine, but I also think in a very remarkable way. It is the case externally I find that you know, where typically We Roll phone calls and we go from call to call to call to meeting to meeting to meeting I'm hearing about people's kids.

3 (7m 49s):
We're talking about school how people ask, how are you and they really listen we're really interested to know and I think that we're doing something where we're Building a foundation where when we do come back we will be stronger and better because of it and I think we're all looking out for each other in an extraordinary way. And I think that that was something we were all moving so quickly before I think slowing down a little bit isn't necessarily the worst thing

2 (8m 16s):
when we come back in just a moment Sharon Lauren talk about their production process and how they find the best stories to tell on screen stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition and we've been hearing from Sarah Harden and Lauren neustadter of the film and TV production company.

2 (9m 1s):
Hello sunshine. I know that the mission of your company is to elevate and to tell stories of women from your perspective Loren. What is this state of state of things now for you know Star Wars stories about women women writing screenplays directing. How would you assess where Hollywood is right now with respect to that.

3 (9m 20s):
I have to tell you. I think it's a great time. Be a woman in Hollywood truly, you know, there are so many people that are doing incredible things, but I certainly put Reese at the top of that list. I think she has really devoted herself to putting women at the center of stories and advocating for women and cheering women on as they are doing the same and talking to them as they're creating production companies. I mean, we're constantly talking about, you know, this person is creating a production company who would be a great person for them to hire this book isn't Actly right for us. But maybe it's exactly the thing that this person is looking for. I think you know, it's a really wonderful time of collaboration among women in Hollywood.

3 (10m 2s):
I have been so inspired by the transformation that I have seen in the time that we have been working at. Hello sunshine, you know telling stories about women has really come to the front of everyone's minds and obviously also representation and inclusion, which is a huge part of our mission at our company I think has become Something obviously that is at the Forefront of every conversation in our industry right now as it should be so I think it's a real time of opportunity and it's quite

2 (10m 32s):
inspiring with respect to your some of your bigger shows and you've got you work with apple obviously on the morning show and I think little fires everywhere is on Hulu and you work with different partners and platforms. Can you kind of walk us through what your strategy is for working with specific Partners on specific projects and other partners on other projects.

3 (10m 52s):
Italy we are very lucky that we were pretty much in business with everybody. We start with telling stories that move us telling stories that we feel passionate about and then what we do were very lucky because we're not tied to one particular place. So what were able to do is find a story that we love find a story that we're passionate about telling put a writer into the project that we know is exactly the right writer find the actress that we think is perfect to star in. Show and then the Hollywood term is packaging. Right? So we put the package together. We put the group of people together that we think is perfect for that project. And when we bring it out into the marketplace, we always choose the place that shares our passions, right?

3 (11m 38s):
So when they love it like we love it. We know it's the right fit and I think we've been very lucky with so many of our shows to really find perfect partners, and we've had great success working with all of the different platforms. It's really been it's been great, you know part of what we

1 (11m 55s):
size of confidence not just our clothes ability, which we take very seriously create great storytelling but also to be great Partners as our platforms launch those stories and I think having the social reach that we do. I mean, we work very hard to just be great marketing Partners as well. And you know, when we have a book like little flies everywhere, you know, we Pat football club in September of 17 on its published right? And so if you've been following our Handles, our our followers have had a two-and-a-half year relationship with little thighs and I fell in love with a book when I read it and I heard when we announced that Carrie and Reese was starring and and so it's a long journey for them.

1 (12m 36s):
And and it's one of the things as a company that we look

2 (12m 40s):
to do. We've got a question from Dante Richardson 23 year old despairing producer. He wants to start a production company in the near future. He's asking for your advice. What is the best advice you have for him? And if you want to get started, what does he do first?

3 (12m 56s):
Well, I think if you wants to be a producer. Best and fastest way to get going is to find a piece of material that he really loves little fires is Sarah was saying is an amazing example of we read a book that hadn't yet published and we loved it and we saw it as something that we wanted to celebrate to our book club. But also we saw it as a limited series we knew what the show was. So I think that my advice for him is try to find a book that you love try to find an article that you think would make a great. Movie or make a great television series and then challenge yourself to take it and put all of the pieces of the puzzle together find a writer that you love come up with a take, you know, and then approached other producers that might be able to Mentor you and guide you we often partner with producers who have incredible taste but might want to partner with us because we're going to help them to flush it out and bring it to life in the way that they really hope.

3 (13m 54s):
So I think there are always opportunities but it starts with great

2 (13m 57s):
material. For we go for both of you when you talked a little bit about how this is a you know, it's been a pause and a time to kind of slow down and not jump from call to call to call to call and and you know, this constant just racing forward. What do you want to take from this this time that you want to apply to what you do as a businesses and as a company forever and ever

1 (14m 19s):
afterwards, you know, I think it's been a time that's like deep Humanity like deeply human leadership. I mean managing three kids. Kids working full-time trying to do my best as a leader and that's what entertainment media is about like human stories. And I just am constantly reminded of that. I'm like proud about how our whole team has really done their best through some very trying circumstances for many of our employees as well. And I don't want to ever lose that Humanity as we sort of hopefully move into a period that's less traumatic and taxing on all of

2 (14m 60s):
Sarah how old are your kids by the way as 1614 and 10 days you gotta kiss and and

3 (15m 6s):
Lauren I have a seven year old and a three year

2 (15m 9s):
old. Yeah. So yeah, I've got a nine-year-old an eleven-year-old. I know it's crazy. But I do think that that what you said earlier Lauren this idea that you know, you're getting to know other people's kids. I mean, it does build empathy right? I mean we're all on these umm calls and we're all kind of seeing with the reality of just kind of getting through the day as for Or our colleagues and I think that's important. I think that actually has created really important connections and in a way that would not have happened. If we if we weren't all thrown into

3 (15m 37s):
this. I will tell you I was on a zoom with the head of a streaming platform and her eight-year-old daughter came in to ask a question in the middle of the zoom and I felt so happy and so relieved because I think we're all going through very similar things where we're trying to do these jobs that we love but we Also trying to stay connected to our children in a moment when we know that they're incredibly vulnerable. It's actually something that Sarah and I talked with Reese about a lot because she has three kids two. And so we spend a lot of time talking to one another's children and it's actually it's actually quite

2 (16m 15s):
nice. Yeah, Lauren sir. Thank you so

3 (16m 17s):
much. Thank you for having us. Thank you for having us gyrus. So

1 (16m 21s):
appreciated all wait, I'm free such a big fan for so many years and so it's like a personal kind of Little thrill to be doing thank you

3 (16m 30s):
very now we were very excited to be having this conversation with you. Thank you for having us.

2 (16m 34s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Sarah Harden the CEO of hello sunshine and Lauren neustadter the head of TV and film at hello sunshine to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR and if you want to find out more about the how I built this It's series or other virtual NPR events. You can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Tyra Lockhart Matt Adams L mannion, John Isabella, Julia Kearney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

2 (17m 14s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR.