2 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more.

1 (15s):
Hey everyone. So I have a request if you value this show if you value the stories the lessons the wisdom and inspiration we bring to you if you think of me as your friend, which I am because even though millions of you. Are listening. I'm actually talking just to you right now. I need you to be there for me as well. And you can do that by supporting what I do and buying my book how I built this it is just out now and available everywhere and it doesn't cost more than a few cups of coffee and it's filled with wisdom and stories and ideas that will have you feeling inspired and fired up to Take On The World.

1 (56s):
So please if you love this show and what we do for you do us one back. And pick up how I built this wherever books are sold. Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how their meeting this very challenging moment in new and creative ways. And today we're going to hear from Jennifer noon door for her. She's the co-founder and managing partner of January Ventures. It's an investment firm focused on Tech startups founded by women and people of color Jennifer join me to talk about how her company is approaching investment strategies during this.

1 (1m 38s):
Unprecedented moment and how they differ from other firms

2 (1m 42s):
overall. What we're doing differently is really building a venture firm that is designed around access and transparency. That's not what venture has traditionally been known for and it's what has really underserved women and underrepresented Founders. And so we make it very easy for Founder's to pitch us and find us in everything that we do is focused on removing friction for those Founders at the earliest age

1 (2m 8s):
and what type of startups do you look for

2 (2m 12s):
we invest primarily Lie in Tech enabled software businesses. So we are investing in companies that we believe can be high growth scalable companies that are going to be Capital efficient. We are investing the capital early and then are looking for outsized returns. So we're looking for companies that can go on to be a hundred million billion dollar companies and really be those outliers that generate returns for our fund

1 (2m 37s):
and you you invest in the in the seed stage and the early stages of yeah for

2 (2m 42s):
business we invest at the proceed and Seed stage and one of the reasons that we do that guy is when we started January we did some early research and there have been a lot of data talking about how how little Centric dollars women receive in 2019 female-only teens received just 3% Aventure dollars and if a woman happen to have a male co-founder, she received eleven percent a venture dollars, but what we found in our data as we look just at the earliest stage is that there's not only a gender gap, but it really It's currently so for every dollar that a male founder raises at the proceed or seed stage a woman raises 38 cents and a black woman raises just two cents.

2 (3m 24s):
And so that is really where we are focused at January because as you can imagine a dollar versus 38 cents on the dollar versus two cents on the dollar many of those Founders are handicapped from the start and so our focus is on getting them the capital and resources that they need to really generate momentum for their business and and get to that scalable growth

1 (3m 45s):
curve. How large is your fund right

2 (3m 47s):
now? Yeah, we're deploying out of a 20 million dollar fund, you know, we're typically writing checks that range up to half a million plus because we're investing at a stage when founders are raising, you know, 250 300 up to a million dollars on a really at those those earliest stages and often the first capital n

1 (4m 8s):
and who are your investors?

2 (4m 10s):
Our investors range so many of them are the typical investors that you would expect to see family offices high-net-worth individuals and some institutions and Foundations, but from the beginning my partner Mar and I wanted to be very deliberate about who are investors who are limited partners were because so much of the traditional Venture model has relied on a very small set of investors or limited partners and has reinforced this flywheel around making that small. Group, very wealthy. And so what we have done in both of our funds is proactively reduce the barriers for non-traditional investors to invest in our fund whether that is, you know, a Founder who is just beginning to accumulate capital and wealth and may not have a lot of liquidity and finding ways for them to participate or you know, pitching LPS who fall outside of the traditional circuit that most funds pitch, you know, whether it's by geography race ethnicity.

2 (5m 12s):
We've really tried to work hard to diversify our

1 (5m 14s):
ltd's how do you find startups to an to invest in

2 (5m 21s):
I mentioned that you know venture has been so long really inaccessible to most Founders and a lot of that is because many Venture capitalists rely on their Network to Source deals, and that's fine. But most of the people that are in someone's Network look or are similar to you know similar. Sue that person we hear a lot of VCS talk about the test can a Founder get a warm intro to them and if so, then they're willing to consider taking a meeting we turned that on her head of January and so from the day that we launched we have been open to cold pitches and when we went out with that many of our peers told us that we were crazy there was we weren't going to see great pitches.

2 (6m 3s):
There was no way that we could handle that sort of volume and we were pretty overwhelmed when we launched in October 2018. We saw four hundred pitches within the first week and so very quickly. We leverage technology to develop a scalable way to review. Those deals were very generous with the first 30-minute meeting. We want Martin and I want to be the first people that are meeting these Founders, right? We want to be the ones who are judging whether they are a fit for our thesis and then we have a higher bar for who we spend time with who we do diligence on and ultimately invest in because the nature of our business is there's a Very wide top of funnel and in any given fund for making 25 to 30 investment.

2 (6m 46s):
So there is it's a pretty darwinian process, but we're deliberate in the organizations that we work with to make sure that we are reaching Founders that really fit that under-represented mold and and telling them that our light is on and we want to be the fund of choice for them.

1 (7m 1s):
So tell me tell me about some of the startups in your

2 (7m 3s):
portfolio. Yeah, this is the part that I love talking about. It's sort of like talking about your kids and it's hard to pick just one but I'll give you you know sense for some of them. We are investing in problems that we believe are big and we really care about solving we're really focused on investing in companies that are addressing big broad problems that are going to shape the future. And so one of those Founders that is really doing this as a founder of Julia Collins, who is the CEO. The company called Planet forward Julia is a Founder who had deep roots in both food and sustainability and you know great founder market fit.

2 (7m 44s):
That's something that we look for a lot and Julia is building a regenerative supply chain for sustainable foods,

1 (7m 51s):
and I just could ice quickly ask you sorry. Yeah. Can you just can you kind of explain just in plain plain language? What is a regenerative supply chain mean? I mean, I know what a supply chain means. I know what regenerative means.

2 (8m 2s):
Yeah, that's a great question guy. It's really about the ingredients and where Brands and you know, and cpg companies are sourcing the ingredients for their food and they would basically evaluate the sustainability and you know on a number of different metrics including the carbon footprint including how those ingredients were were actually farmed and then be able to suggest alternative sources and Alternate whether it's you know, different farmer a different type of ingredients that will have the same impact. So that I as a brand could make those adjustments and make a more sustainable and regenerative

1 (8m 41s):
food product. Right? So if you were looking for palm oil, for example, this platform could say Hey, you know, this is a better place to Source your palm oil from

2 (8m 49s):
that's exactly right and they are really the first ones to do that and what we've seen in the past six months is that consumers, you know between being at home and suddenly really caring about what food they eat and then all of the very visible events in the last, you know couple months around climate change consumers are really starting to there's an acceleration in consumers awareness of climate Friendly Foods and you know being conscious of their choices that they make and wanting those to be sustainable got it one of their company that I'll highlight is a company called kingside a Founder shoddiest egala who is as a repeat founder and withc inside the problem that she solving is How employers and employees find childcare and I mentioned shoddy of because she's an amazingly charismatic entrepreneur.

2 (9m 44s):
She's a great leader. She had built a great company, but we got to March and the world shut down and suddenly no one was sending their kids. Anyway, everyone was shocked at home. And so for this moment, you know, it's suddenly a lot of her business was in question and like many of our founders Shaw Dia saw the long-term opportunity and this looming Child Care crisis that is on the horizon of parents not being able to get back to work because either they can't send their children in person or all of these childcare providers many of them have gone out of business. She's really become a thought leader and he started during covid while people were locked at home laid the foundation for now what the business is doing is getting employees back to work and I'm sure that parents can find child care, even if it's not where they were sending their child prior to the pandemic

1 (10m 40s):
are you saying I mean, there are a lot of has been a lot of momentum. I don't know if it's real or not. But there certainly have been some VC firms that have announced more support for black and Latin X startup Founders and Andreessen Horowitz announced to fund and it's unclear what that will mean but is it it mean are you finding lots and lots of black and Latin X and other doors of color coming to you with with ideas as there are real kind of surge in new ideas coming from founders of color

2 (11m 14s):
guy would say that that supply of black Latin acts lgbtq that supply has always been there and so for us, it's not that we're suddenly seeing a new surge now, I think that we are seeing as it's sort of the industry level. that it is a conversation that more people are having so there's more visibility around the conversation but this Taps into our whole belief for starting January those times have always been there, you know so much of what we are doing is trying to make Venture accessible to those Founders because for so long it hasn't been and their names become synonymous with the Bill Gates and the Mark Zuckerberg is of the world and that's when we will know that we have been

1 (12m 4s):
successful When we come back in just a moment more of my conversation with Jennifer neuendorf. ER and why many entrepreneurs don't want to take Venture Capital stay with us. I'm guy rise and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor HubSpot Legacy CRM platforms have made you compromise for far too long with HubSpot CRM platform. You don't have to choose between Enterprise tools that are powerful or easy to use it gives you both. So your Marketing sales and service teams can align with he's accelerate sales and anticipate every customer need finally.

1 (12m 52s):
There's a CRM platform that helps you run better. So Can grow better without complexity ever getting in the way learn more at HubSpot.com. And just one more thing the how I built this book is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with a ton of stories. You haven't heard and how some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books and please if you What I do on the show, you can show that support by picking up how I built this the book and thanks.

1 (13m 43s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So Venture Capital can be a Lifeline for some companies. But if you listen to a lot of our how I built this episode's you'll hear many Founders tell me they regret taking Venture Capital money at all and other saying that they're glad they avoided it. So when I spoke to Jennifer noon door for of January Ventures, I asked her about the criticisms VCS often get and then knock that that I hear on the show from so many Founders who didn't take the easy money is that VCS expect a 10x return within 10 years and it forces entrepreneurs to focus on scale and only scale. Do you think that's a fair criticism?

2 (14m 23s):
In some cases. Yes, and you know, one of the things that I talk about a lot is venture capital is not right for every business and not every founder should feel like they have to go out and raise outside capital and I think my main piece of advice to Founders and a conversation that I always have with Founders as part of meeting them is aligning the incentives of the capital with the vision and motivation of the of the founder. There is nothing worse and many of Guests have talked about it then having friction and and having those incentives be at odds because the reality is you're right, then to the Venture model requires a really high return fresh whole this is a risky asset class and so investors are going to investors and you know our LTS expect a huge return.

2 (15m 12s):
So I do think that is the right question for Founders to ask themselves out of the gate, but I think the second question is Founders are interested in venture capital is to really do the audience on the fund and the partner who is leaving that deal because there's just a wide variety of outcomes that funds are shooting towards and stylistic differences between partners and so that you know, we always encourage our Founders to due diligence on us because that really will make or break the the quality of that experience and I think will shape how the founder feels on the flip side as having taken Venture

1 (15m 51s):
money Jennifer do you? I mean I get this question a lot and I have my answer to this question where the middle of a global pandemic and an economic crisis and and I think something like fifty percent of the Fortune 500 companies started during economic downturns. Do you think now is a good time to start a business?

2 (16m 11s):
I think that there will be great companies that are born out of the constraints of this moment and we've seen that historically I think that will happen again, but that said it doesn't make it Any easier for prospective Founders to make the leap because the reality is actually quite hard to raise money right now. So right after covid hit in April, we did a survey of our early stage Farmers. We talked to 250 or at least age farmers in our community and it was interesting 50% felt that covid-19 egg actively impact our business, but 50% had already pivoted which just speaks to the nimbleness of early.

2 (16m 54s):
Each Founders in the fact that in a certain sense covid is put everyone back at the starting line and sort of reset the opportunities for early stage startups. But the more interesting point guy was that 70% of the founders said they their experience was that funding opportunities were drying up and so with that context it's very easy for you know, venture capitalist like me to sit here and say now is the time to build go out great companies are going to be born. But as a Founder considering making that leap that lets us fiery environment to just leap right into and so, you know our response to that was to launch launched new initiatives to really make it easy for Founder's to fundraise.

2 (17m 41s):
I've scale one of the things we did and continue to do as an event called pitch Collective. We have all these inbound cold pitches right where we're meeting Founders who aren't in our network, but we realized that you know, they're just Pitching us and at the end of the day, that's not that scalable because they're going to have 2250 meetings with Venture capitalists. And so what we've done is gather 10 to 15 other GPS other Venture funds to join us for those pitches and it's a small thing, but it's one of the examples that we are doing to just try to take that friction out and really try to support Founders because there's a lot of opportunity, but it's also a really challenging time to build a business.

1 (18m 22s):
I'm going to take a question from Book, this is from Deborah. Gladney. She writes use in Wichita Kansas. She writes as a black female founder. It's great to see Capital being deployed to help minority Founders, but by a still exists. So what are VCS in your case you what are you doing to combat the bias that we all know exists the systemic bias.

2 (18m 41s):
Yeah Debra that's such a great question. And one of the things that we're doing Deborah is taking a hard look and being intentional at the questions that we asked Founders. So one of the the way is the bias can show up is in the things that Venture capitalists ask Founders when they're in a diligence meeting and so we've taken a really hard look at that and I've actually begun to script out our view of the key questions that we want to cover so that they are the same whether it is, you know, a white woman a black man a black woman whoever it is and also regardless of the geography because I have invested now both on the coast and in the middle of the country and there's a lot of bias that we see in terms of the questions that Founders from the middle of the country get asked versus Founders on the

1 (19m 29s):
coast. Yeah. I remember we interviewed Toby left Kiev Shopify and when he initially looked for funding everybody told to leave Ottawa and to move his operations to Silicon Valley and he didn't want to yeah, so multibillion-dollar business today. So what advice do you have for up-and-coming entrepreneurs who are looking to pitch what stands out to you in a pitch?

2 (19m 53s):
We see so many pitches and it is hard to make a pitch stand out in this new role and it's even harder to make it stand out when you're doing it via Zoom. You don't know what the person who's watching. The pitch is doing on the other end. Yeah, and so we encourage our Founders to really invest in nailing that virtual pitch and one thing that we really love is when founders. Do you know whether it's using loom or some other screen recording send us a pic? That is not just a slide deck. It's them delivering the pitch and there's nothing better than that. You have to be charismatic. You need to get the point across but then we hear how the founder would tell their story rather than flipping through on a static PowerPoint.

2 (20m 38s):
So that's one way that we really encourage Founders to stand out and then it's all about running a tight fundraising process. And so being clear about who it is that you think you may be a good fit for going out for them hard and dating some urgency and momentum about run the race because frankly the scarcest resource in all of this is a found her side every single fundraising pitch eats up their time and something that we are really conscious of in our process not to have 10 meetings with a Founder because they don't have that type of time. Yeah. So, you know, I think being protective of your time as a founder and running a tight process getting to a quick know if you know if that's what where it's going don't be afraid of that but really lean in hard to the ones where there does seem to be a fit and then you know guy I mentioned this before but really doing diligence on your investors so so much of the fundraising Dynamic is set up for funds and GPS to diligence Founders, but it really should be a two-way street because you're giving these people ownership in your company and make sure that they are willing, you know that we write that we as Venture capitalists are willing to work for that ownership and that we're really going to provide value

1 (21m 51s):
how much of the decision Ends 2 back a company are based on your intuition. And how much of it is based on like just doing the math and plugging in the numbers into a spreadsheet and and looking at the

2 (22m 3s):
result. We look for three things when we're looking at Founders. The first is a big Market. We need to believe that the company is going after a big Market or that they're going to create a big Market II that we look for are evangelist customers. So we invest really Really? We don't expect there to be a lot of customers but it's easy to stand up some sort of MVP of a product. Right? The first version is probably going to be ugly. It may be held together on the backend manually with a little bit of duct tape, but then we'd like to see someone who has used the product and is wild about it. But then the third place guy that we spend most of our time is on the founder and the team and getting to a place where we believe that that that team is differentially suited to build this company and to be successful.

2 (22m 57s):
So sometimes it's Unique Insight that they have sometimes it's really differentiated experience. Sometimes it's just, you know, sort of a magnetic leader that can make things happen and that it into a certain extent that is a gut feel but we try to put data into it. We spend a lot of time doing reference calls so that it isn't, you know, Marv and I sitting here and we have a call with someone and have a good gut Kill me say yes, we really tried to check our own gut feel and aren't instance with data from people who know them.

1 (23m 29s):
Well great chef Fernando for of January Ventures. Thank you so much for joining us.

2 (23m 34s):
Thank you. It's great to be here guy.

1 (23m 37s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Jennifer neuendorf Ur co founder of January Ventures to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to check out other past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR Our if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by JC Howard with help from will Mitchell Bruce Grant Matt Adams L mannion, Gianna, Kappa Dona, John, Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Farah Safari. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR.