0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Adyen. Adyen is the payments platform that adapts with your business. So you can accept all kinds of payments with one single integration, Adyen, business, not boundaries. Visit a D Y E n.com/ NPR. Hey, everyone. Welcome to how I built this Resilience addition from NPR I'm guy Ross, and on these episodes, we're hearing from entrepreneurs and business leaders about how they've been building Resilience into their businesses during this very challenging time. And today my conversation with Loren and Lisa Poncia of Stemple Creek Ranch Stemple Creek Ranch produces beef, pork and lamb on more than a thousand acres in Marin County, California.

0 (45s):
It's one of the only carbon neutral livestock ranches in the United States Loren is a fourth-generation rancher and he and his wife, Lisa transformed Stemple Creek into an organic regenerative farm 15 years ago today they sell their grassfed meat to restaurants and grocery stores across the Bay area, and also directly to consumers across the U S. So my first question to Loren was how do you make such a carbon intensive product, like meet carbon neutral?

1 (1m 17s):
Guy what we try and do is what we call a dance with mother nature. So basically replicating weather in nature in what she did across the great Plains, you know, hundreds of years ago, with massive herds of bison crossing, the great Plains they were regenerating the soil just naturally. So they would eat the grass in front of them, stump on the grass below and poop on the grass behind him that actually regenerated the soil and grew more perennial plants, and really it's a photosynthesis business. So if we have a living plant in the ground, that's capturing sunlight, it's growing. And with photosynthesis, pulling CO2 out of the atmosphere are storing it in the soil. So

0 (1m 55s):
Are you able to actually measure it? We think of cows, for example, as you know, creating methane and that contributes of course, to carbon pollution, but are you able to actually measure how you're, you're able to sequester that carbon and offset the methane that they release?

1 (2m 11s):
We have some really good data. This is the fun part about our businesses. A lot of times people say, Oh, this is what we're doing, but we actually have hard data. We started this Marin carbon project about seven years ago, and we did a study about applying compost and how the compost effects sequestering carbon or not sequestering carbon in our soils applied with all of our other management practices like fencing off the right peri in areas, planting trees, diversity, and our pastures. And basically what the data seven years later shows is we're sequestering about a thousand pounds of carbon per acre per year managing it the way we are, even our control plots. So our other management practices, besides a plant compost are really helping with sequestering carbon and how many healthy soil as well.

1 (2m 58s):
From what I understand mean, one of the things

0 (3m 0s):
That releases carbon into the atmosphere is when soil is churned, right? And you Airaid it. So what do you do to avoid doing that?

1 (3m 8s):
Do you have a pretty intense rotational grazing system or pulse grazing? We call it where we rotate the cattle round in large herds, and we try and replicate mother nature. We're not perfect at it, but we try and it just promotes perennial plants that are going to make more, more photosynthesis, which is going to sequester more carbon in the soil.

0 (3m 27s):
Loren we featured you on our, a segment we did on the show a couple of years ago called how you built that, which unfortunately, we had to put on pause this year because of other things we're doing. And I had a chance to visit your Ranch as you know, and it was amazing to see some of the things that, that just blew me away. For example, you plant chicory a plants because I guess they have deep roots and they air at the soil and you've got worm farms or the worms like dig into the soil, things like that. Can you explain that?

1 (3m 54s):
So basically a lot of people would say, what's your biggest limiting nutrient in a California dry land pasture. And many people would say, Oh, it's water because we're a dry half of the year, but that's not really truly our limiting factor. Our biggest limiting factors air in the soil. Cause without air in the soil, it's like a human with a 300 pound weight on our chest. So there's three ways to get air in the soil. One is with a plow. And when you're plowing with the tractor, you're actually releasing carbon into the atmosphere. The other one is with roots roots, get down into the soil and break up the soil. And when they die, they leave air in the soil and the other is with worms. So we're trying to embrace not the plow and embrace the worms and the roots.

1 (4m 38s):
And so there's diversity in the pasture is real important. And chicory has a deep tap, root plantation has a deep tap root. And there's some other really awesome natural plants that have deep taproots that actually help break up the soil and their perineal. Yeah. They live for five, 10 years and they're super nutritious. The cattle loved them and the sheep loved them and they make great coffee.

0 (5m 1s):
Yeah, Loren you are a fourth generation, California rancher. And I know that as a kid, you watched your parents struggle to make ends meet while they were raising cattle that they would sell to, you know, larger cattle ranches. And, and you even vowed never to go into the family business. You were in the veterinary pharmaceuticals for a while, but you did come back and you and Lisa decided to transform the family farm into an organic grass fed farm. How did you come to that decision and why?

1 (5m 32s):
You know, I think that really comes down to guy's. You have to be dissatisfied with their current results to create change and try something different. I'm super passionate about raising high quality food. And we had to figure out a way that we can do this and actually make money and not struggle. So we figured out very quickly, the way to do that was to be the price maker instead of the price taker and have a unique product do what's right. For the, at the same time we do it for the environment we're, we're making money on it. We've totally flipped the whole paradigm. And instead of just being a price taker and doing what everybody else does, we've gone out and changed our market and created our own brand and basically dictate to the market what we need to be able to make a profit and do what's right.

0 (6m 17s):
Right. And you can command a higher price because it's organic, it's grass fed and all of these other things. Yeah.

1 (6m 23s):
That's worked for us so far and we're, we're really excited about being able to do this and make the improvements on the Ranch and supply something that consumers want consumers are asking for it. Let's give it to them.

0 (6m 34s):
I wanted to talk about what happened in March, right? Because March of 2020 hits the pandemic, it's clear that it is here. Everything starts to shut down. I mean, your business depends off on restaurants on the grocery store. Were you worried that the bottom was going to fall out? Very

1 (6m 53s):
Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely.

2 (6m 56s):
It was a very scary time for, I mean, for all of us, but we, it was definitely very tumultuous.

0 (7m 1s):
What did you expect would happen? I

2 (7m 3s):
Would say our most immediate concern was that our team, our staff was not going to be able to work. They were going to, or we were going to get sick or we weren't going to be able to physically leave our homes to go to the workplace. Once we started grinding through that and it became clear that we were considered an essential business and that we could, you know, work. Then the biggest fear became our, our vendors that a harvest and process our products for us and cut and wrap them and essentially get them ready for us to sell. Where are they going to be able to stay in business? It was a very stressful, it was a very complicated, there was a lot involved, but at the end of the day, we were able to keep all of that moving and to really work with our vendors and to help them.

2 (7m 51s):
And they helped us. And there was many changes that we had to make lots of sleepless nights, but it did work out. Yeah.

0 (7m 58s):
I wonder Lisa around that time, we had Gary Erickson of cliff bar on the show and he was saying, it's crazy. We can't keep 'em on the shelves. Presumably the restaurant side of your business, you saw an immediate decline, but did you start to see an uptick in direct to consumer orders through your website?

2 (8m 12s):
We did. So interestingly enough, just before the pandemic, we were featured on a Netflix TV show called ugly delicious, so about steak. So we were already seeing a decent influx to our online sales because of that. And then COVID hit right in the middle of March. And we definitely saw quite a bit of increased traffic on our website for our direct to consumer sales. And you are correct at the very same time at a restaurant business, completely tanked, you know, most restaurants at that time, just completely shut their doors. Some were open, you know, at a very limited basis. And so then it became the logistical issue of how do we take all of this product that was processed and, you know, cut and wrapped and ready to sell, like in large quantities and pieces to restaurants and food service, and somehow re process that into retail cuts so that we could have them available for the direct to consumer

0 (9m 15s):
Sales, right? Because restaurants are buying like an entire, like a huge piece in there. They're butchering it themselves,

1 (9m 24s):
The rent by a 12 pound written by a 15 pound rib-eye. And we had to cut that down into one pound stakes to be able to sell on the line.

0 (9m 31s):
Right. By the way, I mean, I assume that you can only do what you do on a small scale. I mean, is that right? I mean, could you do this at like a factory farm that produces thousands of tons of meet a week? Like what you do, how you raise animals. We have here

1 (9m 47s):
As a country could raise a lot more grass, fed grass, finished beef. If we changed the paradigm of what conventional agriculture doesn't in the Midwest, I mean it's row crops and corn and soy, which are heavily subsidized. If we converted that land back to pasture land, perennial pastureland, we could grow probably enough meat for the entire nation. It is possible it's gaining steam and there's more and more people doing this every day, but it's not an overnight snap of the fingers. Quick fix.

0 (10m 19s):
Yeah. You know, I remember when I was a kid, beef was expensive. Like when we had a steak dinner, it was a big deal. My dad would come home with a T-bone steak from Ralph's in the middle is a big deal. And now like the price of meat is so low.

2 (10m 33s):
That's a huge part of it. And we talk about this all the time is that that's part of a paradigm shift. Is that okay, maybe producing it this way is more expensive, but then maybe you eat less

1 (10m 46s):
And there is the true, there's a true cost. That's not measured in the, what you pay for it at the grocery store when you're buying conventional meat. And the true cost is the subsidized feed that goes into it and the environmental or the way that employees are treated, you know, all of those types of things. And I'm the conventional industry has a very, very efficient, so they can do it cheaply, but they are not necessarily very, very resilient. And that's what we ran into during the COVID times where huge packing plants, where people were as close as me and Lisa, you know, making one knife cut, we're getting sick with COVID on the packing plants were getting shut down. Our small processors were more resilient because they could give each other space and they were, I dunno, it wasn't as efficient.

1 (11m 29s):
It's not as cheap to do it, but it's more resilient if that makes sense.

0 (11m 34s):
Hmm. So, I mean, is there a world where, because I love this idea of eating less meat, eating it mindfully, right? You might pay a little bit more, but you're not going to eat it every day because right now, you know, grass fed organic, sustainable carbon neutral meat like that you make, which is still very rare. The United States it's compared to a, a McDonald's burger, for sure. Is there a world where it could be produced and sold at a lower price point? Or is that just an impossibility?

1 (12m 6s):
No, I th I think we're headed that direction as more and more people learn about it and become efficient and understand how to raise the cattle. I think in 20 years, it's going to be very common that you see grass fed organic meet on the grocery store shelves. That's, you know, a lot more affordable even now. It's not unaffordable. When you look at the nutrient density of grassfed meat, compared to all of the other things on the grocery store, it's actually relatively cheap. When you look at the nutrient density, it's just, you know, do you need to eat two pounds a day or do you need to eat two ounces a day?

0 (12m 42s):
We're getting a lot of questions in, so I'm going to go to some of them. Now, this is from Megan Brunner via LinkedIn. Megan asks, do you have any predictions to when regenerative agriculture will become mainstream, kind of like How organic and non-GMO have become mainstream.

2 (12m 59s):
I already see such an influx and so much more interest in it in so many more farmers and ranchers getting really excited about it. So we are absolutely on that.

1 (13m 10s):
I think it's like a tidal wave. You know, the groundswell is building and it's coming, but a lot of it comes back too and not to get political that the different administrations now with the new administration, I think there'll be more focused on regenerative and carbon type of farming practices. It will affect the future of food.

2 (13m 30s):
Even 10 years ago, we very much felt like we were going against the grain. And a lot of people thought we were a little wackadoodle, which maybe we are. I'm sure we are, especially with our kids at home, but even that has changed. And that's the only 10 years, 10 years is not a long time.

0 (13m 48s):
When we come back in just a moment, more of my conversation with Loren and Lisa Poncia and how they navigate being partners in life and in business, stay with us. I'm Guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this Resilience addition from NPR support for NPR in the following message. Come from first Republic bank from buying a home two, starting a business. First Republic bank is committed to offering you exceptional service for a lifetime of goals from day one, you'll have a dedicated first Republic banker who knows you by name and can offer financial solutions tailored to your unique needs.

0 (14m 29s):
Learn more today@firstrepublic.com member FDAC equal housing lender. Hey, welcome back to how I built this Resilience edition. And I'm talking with Loren and Lisa Poncia they're the owners of Stemple Creek Ranch in Marin County, California Loren and Lisa met in college and neither them expect it to be running a thousand acre family farm. In fact, Loren had once vowed, never to run the family business. Now they are juggling all of this while raising their family during an extremely challenging year. And obviously it hasn't been easy. Here's the question from Vivek Sinha in it before I asked a question on a preface it, by saying the story of the two of you, because you work together, you run the business.

0 (15m 15s):
Your story is also fascinating. Cause I know you both met in college at Cal poly San Luis Obispo. Loren you are studying veterinary science and Lisa you were intending to become a lawyer. You did become a lawyer. I don't think you had any intentions of ever working as a farmer. You grew up in Los Angeles and you are a husband and wife team. Vivek asks, how do you, as a husband, wife team make it work? He says his wife and he are in the same profession. And 2020s made it really challenging to find a work life balance. Amen,

2 (15m 44s):
Vivek. So we both probably have some comments here. It's very challenging, but I would say what has made it work for us is two things. One that me and Loren very much have different skill sets. And we come from very different places. And so we have tried to embrace each other's philosophies and strengths and weaknesses. And so we have a very different sandboxes in our business. Loren has his sandbox. I try really hard not to disrupt what he's doing in his sandbox. I have my sandbox. Likewise, it doesn't always work, but we try really hard and you know, it does make it really challenging to have any sort of definition, you know, between work and life.

2 (16m 30s):
We really don't. It's just like one whole big thing. But doing this with your life partner definitely makes it makes success so much sweeter. Loren,

1 (16m 41s):
You know, stay in their own sandbox whenever there's conflict in our relationship, because there is no line between business and relationship. It's, we're always on, you know, it's, I'm getting in to her sandbox usually. And I needed to stay on my, in my side. But that being said, like our goal is to put systems in place as business owners so that in five years we can be luxuries to the business. We don't have to show up every day in order to make this thing run. And Lisa is doing an amazing job, steering our ship in that direction. And we have a great staff and I mean, the staff has really just blown it up in a COVID times.

0 (17m 20s):
I know that you have a diversified business because it's not just ranching the lamb and pork and beef, which is your main business, but it's also restaurants that are our customers. You've got grocery stores all over the Bay area. There's direct to consumer, but you also have on the farm and event space, a beautiful event, space and conference center, which presumably hasn't been active this year. But you know, given that you're so diversified, do you think that was the key to kind of keeping you guys in the black and actually from what I understand, you had a profitable year.

2 (17m 50s):
We did, we are Ranch and our meat business had a profitable year. I absolutely think that our diversification is what helped us stay afloat this year. At the very beginning 15 years ago, when we were getting into this, we discussed heavily that in order to have sustainable agriculture, it had to be sustainable for our family. And that meant we had to be able to actually make a living. It couldn't be a hobby. So given that agriculture in general is so volatile and there are so many things that are outside of our control with mother nature and just so many other pieces. I really want it to be diversified and have many different enterprises. That's why we have a beef and lamb and pork and why we had more than one distribution chain of, you know, grocery stores, restaurants direct to consumer.

2 (18m 39s):
And it's also a huge part of why we did. They accept the Ranch and create this beautiful education barn where we can have a farm to table dinners and host weddings and fundraisers and corporate events. It just creates more stability to the whole ecosystem, but it also allows us a venue where we can bring in people to teach them about local agriculture and about S and the other producers in our area. And hopefully go home and tell their friends and neighbors.

0 (19m 8s):
How much can you expand as a business? I mean, if regenerative farming right by its nature means that you can't have hundreds of thousands of cattle, like a huge factory farm, where are their opportunities for your business to grow?

1 (19m 22s):
I specifically remember 10 years ago, we sold all of our production and I looked at Lisa, I'm like, there's no way we can grow anymore. And she goes with the demand was so high. Yeah. I said, there's no way we can grow anymore. And she said, well, figure out a way you can do it. So what we've done recently is, well, I mean, its kind of my full-time job is to find more pasture that we can fix up and work into our system in different regions that have green grass when we don't have green grass. And then we do the dance, like I'm saying with mother nature and we harvest animals from a different pasture in July. And then we do in January and we work with other like-minded people.

1 (20m 2s):
So going back to one of your earlier question is like, is the groundswell of regenerative agriculture growing? Yes, because we get people that call us every day and want to work with us that are ranchers agriculture, but they don't want to sell direct to consumers. They want to raise the animals. They don't want to talk to people. And I'm like, well, we have that recipe down. Like we can both raise and talk to people if you help us raise the cattle our way. And so we're being a a hundred percent honest and transparent, but we don't raise all of the animals necessarily on our Ranch.

0 (20m 35s):
Right. But you, you have a process that you oversee and certain guidelines that they have to follow in order to, to be Stemple Creek a hundred percent. There is a question from Karthik of I Facebook, Karthik asks, there are a lot of meatless alternatives, right? We've done Ethan Brown. We've done Pat Brown and foods on the show, really, you know, interesting person. I mean, Pat Brown has a vision that people will stop eating meat, animal meat, because it does contribute to global carbon emissions. A lot of that has to do with deforestation. And so he's trying to create a meatless alternatives with impossible meat. I mean, do you think that meatless alternatives could eventually replace animal meat? I mean, do you think that's a plausible possibility?

1 (21m 18s):
I think when it comes to a true nutrient density, I much prefer cows over chemists. I think that, you know, there's trends in the industry where people want to have like no meat Monday or meatless Monday and me as a father of two beautiful daughters, I'd rather have no sugar Sunday than Nomi Monday because sugar is causing way more dietary issues and health issues for both the planet and for consumers. And I think that, you know, there's a lot of misconceptions about what animal agriculture does for the environment. Most of these cattle are raised on non-farm land. It's not like we're putting cattle on the flat land that you can drive a tractor to grow these other things.

1 (22m 1s):
So we could have a whole show just on this topic. Guy I would much rather do what mother nature intended, in my opinion, what mother nature intended and eat an animal that has grown naturally. Then I wouldn't something that's has a patent formulated in the laboratory that's made in doors and process

0 (22m 21s):
To be clear, I eat beyond meat. I eat impossible burgers. I eat more meat too. I mean, I eat all of them. There are some extremely compelling arguments, obviously that people like Pat Brown and Ethan Brown and, and others who are making plant-based meats would argue in a counter to what, what you're saying, but we'll leave it at that and say, I understand your point of view. I want to get to another question is a very technical question, but I love this question because I think the whole appreciates, Dan Reed asks this question by a Facebook. Do you have any knowledge or experience with nitrogen fixing plants that have deep taproots? I don't entirely understand the question, but I think

1 (22m 59s):
You might. Well, that's a great question because we, we routinely plant those, but there's lots of legumes are nitrogen fixing plants. Basically they pull nitrogen from the atmosphere and then they excrete it and nodules in the soil and nitrogen is what makes the plants grow combined with photosensitive. So it's a soil science ecology question all in one, but the biggest thing, both in life, in our human populations and our soil populations and our forage populations and livestock grazing forage is diversity. We want lots of different plants working together and it makes beautiful music. When you have lots of different plants, not monocrop of just alfalfa or just soy or just corn.

0 (23m 42s):
We are starting to see huge meat companies getting into the organic and natural. And they've been doing that for awhile. You know, do you think that's a good thing for the industry that these huge producers of meat are coming in and buying up these small organic, natural ranches, or does that concern you?

1 (24m 2s):
It really makes a statement that consumers want this transparency, honesty, and quality, and the big boys that have the money are trying to fix their brands by buying a great reputation companies. And they, you can't ignore the almighty dollar from the consumer. If they want to hit their numbers, they can't ignore grass fed organic. I think it's really the consumer's power by voting with their dollars that are driving these decisions.

0 (24m 28s):
What are your sort of plans for the post pandemic era with your business? Where are you looking to focus your energy first when you can,

1 (24m 36s):
We're talking about that actively right now. But I would say in my opinion, that the industry has fast-forwarded 10 years and the direct to consumer is the future of our business. Either online, home delivery or us delivering direct to people. And we're going to embrace that a lot and we're going to embrace lots of farm to table dinners and getting people out to the farm in educating them and breaking bread together and drinking good wine because we love that. But I don't know if I missed something. No, that's you hit it.

0 (25m 5s):
I mean, it's almost like we're going back to the fifties where you got your dairy products delivered to your door and your eggs delivered to your door now. I mean, we could be going back to that.

1 (25m 14s):
Yeah, absolutely. And it creates amazing connections between the person eating the food at their table and whoever produced the product and more of that is the only a good thing in there. What's old is new.

0 (25m 27s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Loren and Lisa, Poncia the owners of Stemple Creek Ranch in Marin County, California to see our full live interview. You can go to facebook.com/how I built this. And if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com/ NPR. And don't forget you can join our live conversations every Thursday at 9:00 AM, Pacific noon Eastern. If you want to find out more about the, how I built this Resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents.org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with help from para Safari, JC Howard Bruce Grant Elmanian Jianna Keppra, Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers.

0 (26m 13s):
Our intern is Janet <inaudible> Lee I'm Guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this Resilience addition from NPR.