NPR (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more.

NPR - Guy (15s):
Hey, it's Guy here. So I've never asked you for much. This show is free and we think about it as kind of like a free MBA program each week. We bring you the stories of failure Triumph pivot strategic challenges. Mishaps and problem-solving from some of the world's greatest entrepreneurs and it's all free and always will be but now I'm asking you to consider buying my new book based on the show. It's called how I built this and it only costs about 20 bucks and this book is designed for anyone who's thinking of building something or just wants to be inspired by people who have built some of the most iconic companies and brands on Earth and if you preorder it now like in the next few days I will send you a free signed bookplate.

NPR - Guy (1m 3s):
So please go to how I built this.com or Gyros.com to order the book and get your free signed book plate. Hey everyone, and welcome to How I Built This resilience addition. These episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're coping during this crazy time. And today we're going to hear from Luke Holden and Ben Conniff, the cofounders of Luke's Lobster. We first met Luke and been last year in Boston when we told their story in front of a live audience, their episode came out last November and you can check it out if you're interested anyway, since then Luke's Lobster has gone through the These stages of a restaurant during covid which meant furloughing and temporarily closing more than 30 restaurants in the US Taiwan and Japan.

NPR - Guy (1m 54s):
Luke and Ben not only oversee a restaurant chain, but they also work closely with their fishermen to buy process and ship Lobster and other Seafood around the u.s. I spoke with Luke and Ben from their office, which is right by the water in Portland, Maine. So you might hear some boat engines and glass clinking in the background, but it it kind of feels like you're catching lobsters with them. So when it became clear that the pandemic was really going to create some some severe economic disruptions. You guys had to take some severe actions, right? I mean you had to you to shut down your processing plant you had to let go about 300 employees walk us through the process of what you did as you realize this was going to be really severe.

Luke (2m 37s):
It was absolutely horrible. It was really March 7th through that week that this kind of Slammed home for us. I think we were good to act quickly but this business I mean not just because my namesake is that it might in my family is part of it. There is no difference or delineation between my personal business life. So when you're faced with ultimately making that critical decisions to like save a business, it affects your family and friends and major ways and and that week was there's nothing like like that I've ever experienced calling up some of your friends and family members. And and furloughed terminating reducing salary.

Luke (3m 19s):
We got super small that week. We got aligned around some strategic initiatives pretty quickly safety and people was always our number one priority is moving all our Lee's to unemployment and doing it quickly was intentional. We knew that there was going to be backlogs in the unemployment office has something like that was intentional to act quickly there for their benefit. We also made sure that we had personal conversation. With every single one of those teammates there was no tax. There was no email. There was no like untethered connection. We made sure that they understood the why behind all of these decisions and the intention behind it. And and that continued we made sure that we kept tabs and open dialogue with all of those teammates so that we ended up shutting everything down besides one Shack.

Luke (4m 7s):
And and now I've got Seafood Company back up and going we've got 12 Shacks up and going there's no way we've been able Don't do that unless we had that mentality of people first and make sure that we had those open Communications to bring people back in the time was right.

NPR - Guy (4m 23s):
What did you say to an employee that you had to furlough? I mean, what was the conversation? Like, how did you explain that?

Luke (4m 29s):
It was tough transparency is one of our core brand values. We were not going to separate ourselves from any of our core brand values during this crisis. So we were honest with them. We were in a tough spot. We were very seasonal business to begin with we make most of our hey Memorial Day to labor day and this couldn't have happened at a worse time for a business like us because we're kind of at the end of our rope to begin with we're just at the end of our reserve and just about to start building rebuilding reserves. So when this comes in sales go from a hundred down to 20% or eventually nothing there was nothing in the in the kitty to help get us on the other side of this. So we were honest about that and we were able to have good Frank honest conversations with our teammates because we made sure we've over Did in every kind of Step of this we made sure they understood what was in our heads and how we are making decisions and I think as a result, we've always had very very good relationships and trust with our teammates.

Luke (5m 26s):
So they understood that really don't have any other option.

Ben (5m 29s):
I'll also say like the thing that everyone on this team understands is that we're here for a larger Community than even just the Luke's Lobster team, you know, we're here for a seafood industry. We're here for Ian and truckers and people in the production facility ultimately if we're not there to buy the seafood as we've promised come May June July then the entire machine fails and you felt that many more people. So every teammate at Luke's understands that they're part of that broader family and that for them, you know to go on unemployment to stay safe then actually was creating the opportunity.

Ben (6m 14s):
Come summer for us to continue buying and continue that ecosystem working.

NPR - Guy (6m 20s):
Yes. How time how it's working? Because I know back in May you open you've got a processing a lobster processing plant in Maine. That's where all the lobster that sold at your restaurants and that you sell to other restaurants that goes through there. It's not operating at full capacity. You've got I think about roughly 30 restaurants in the country and about 12 that are now open. So I'm assuming that you know, you're not able to buy the quantities of lobster that that you Had expected or hoped to buy, you know starting in May. Is that right?

Luke (6m 48s):
It's right. So in the u.s. About 70% of the seafood is consumed with in restaurants. And so when you completely take that out of the supply chain, you're left with a complete imbalance and we knew that heading into this. So for us, we've had to Pivot from selling to other restaurants and food service and casinos and cruise lines and build that grocery branded business that we had -- we had to we had to get from Big unbranded commodity packs and start producing grocery branded freezer and refresh container type packages. So like that was a huge pivot for us.

NPR - Guy (7m 27s):
Because obviously you can't sell to cruise lines and casinos are probably on buying a whole lot. And as you say, restaurants are not buying a whole lot you kind of had to shift your focus to like what frozen lobster and and lobster meat that you sell at grocery stores, that that's available for consumers to just purchase?

Luke (7m 45s):
In a nutshell like fishermen go out and fish; we want these guys will go out and compete and earn a living. So we've had to figure out how to produce a similar amount of production at our Seafood Company. And even though the restaurant sales are not taking nearly as much volume as they were pretty covid or last year. We've had to take that production and reallocate it.

Ben (8m 8s):
Yeah. I mean, I think really the Silver Lining here was looking at how people started behaving in their kitchens. Once they were locked down, you know, they weren't just starting their own sourdough. There are also starting to cook seafood a lot more than they ever have before, you know, we noticed that there was just a new openness to trying new things in your home kitchen. So taking that conversation and starting it with our partners at Whole Foods. They were actually eager to help us move more seafood and they came to us and asked how they could actually buy more Lobster and how they could you know, put inventory we would have sent to our restaurants into their Seafood case or into an Innovative product like a lobster cake.

Ben (8m 57s):
And so the first step was improving our grocery business and growing it.

NPR - Guy (9m 2s):
Yeah. So midmark to was supposed to be a huge Sea Food Expo. It was gonna happen in Boston the North American Seafood Expo. This is a huge opportunity for you. And then I guess at the beginning of March a lot of the Chinese exhibitors just start pulling out. I mean, were you already starting to think about the possibility of we're seeing today already that early, or were you just kind of thinking? Well, let's wait and see?

Luke (9m 26s):
We were fortunate and unfortunate to start to have rumblings of this and reality of this through our partners in Japan. It was pretty wild how those conversations tracked exactly how this played out in the U.S. We and the country really had that mentality that this wasn't going to happen to us.

NPR - Guy (9m 48s):
Now. You've got locations in Japan and Taiwan. How are those locations doing? I mean are they opened? Are they sort of operating normally in comparison to the ones in the u.s.?

Luke (9m 59s):
They're open. So there's 10 shacks in Japan they're open and they've made a lot of the similar decisions that we've seen restaurants in the US. do. You know they've got some of their best and brightest making the food and serving guests and changing their labor model and renegotiating rents with the landlord's don't want to be long-term Partners. But the reality is that they are highly dependent on International tourism. And there's none of that ,so they're working on fraction of sales as well.

NPR - Guy (10m 25s):
You know, it's really interested to read about some kind of really creative things. You did obviously going to directly to Consumers by packaging Lobster. You're also going direct to Consumer through your through the website and I think I read that like some of your Shacks started, you know, like when customers came to pick up Meals, they were also selling things like Like flour and butter and like household Pantry Staples, which is super cool. I mean really creative right? What what are what are some other things that you've been thinking about even tactics you're thinking about as you move forward to to kind of, you know, try and diversify your revenue streams and keep everything, you know, moving forward?

Ben (11m 3s):
I think that you know, what you said about the direct-to-consumer e-commerce is really one of the most exciting things that's been happening here and that, and that has happened here. And that It really goes back to mid-march, when we first realized we were going to have to start shutting down shacks for a period of time. That we didn't know how long it was going to be. All we knew is we need to find a way to keep buying seafood and getting Seafood to people who want it. So it was actually an amazing experience. We had one of our teammates who was our culinary director named Lauren just suddenly have to start researching how to build an e-commerce business.

Ben (11m 45s):
Yes, and you know that it only really been a pie in the sky hope for us before then. So she started digging into the nuts and bolts, and then Megan on our marketing team started figuring out how you market and advertise an e-commerce business, and it was almost like me and Luke in 2009 all over again. Because they're in this kind of pressure cooker, 'don't have time, don't have experience, just need to figure it out' situation. And in seven days they had stood up this website it was Pretty heroic experience to be a part of.

NPR - Guy (12m 17s):
When we come back in just a moment Luke and then talk about Maine's seafood supply chain and how it will be affected in the coming months. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor 3M who's using science and Innovation to help the world respond to covid-19. 3M is on track to produce two billion respirators globally by the end of 2020 in addition 3 m is also maximize production of other Solutions, including biopharma filtration hand sanitizers and disinfectants.

NPR - Guy (12m 58s):
Learn more at three m.com covid Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition Luke Holden and been conniff are not only the cofounders of Luke's Lobster. They're also the owners of a seafood processing facility that works closely with fishermen in Maine. We have had other restaurant tours and food companies on the show throughout the covid period we talked to Danny Meyer, you know, famously the founder of Shake Shack and Union Square Cafe and he's sort of, a lot of chefs and restaurateurs look to him and there's no question that this has been the biggest challenge for the food and restaurant industry and easily and half a century.

NPR - Guy (13m 44s):
Are you sort of seeing or, looking out across your industry and seeing how some are dealing with this creatively. Are you sort of other ideas out there that you have seen that seem to be working at that may work for you?

Luke (13m 57s):
Given that we're vertically integrated Seafood Company we have to At all of our stakeholders and we've got to solve problems in our own supply chain. Again, our fishermen are, they're going to go out and fish and they need to that to get their livelihoods going and then our production facility a hundred and fifty teammates there – they need those jobs and they need a mono on a monthly basis. So, leaning into that supply chain and saying okay, what're our customers buying and then how do we build robust businesses around that? We are grocery branded business in 2009. Probably did around 200,000 units between two different skus will be over a million units that are here and then that other side of the business the e-commerce business think bluefin tuna.

Luke (14m 44s):
We've got boats tied up around here because there's no market for an incredible product like bluefin tuna. So we started sell that on our e-commerce site and it's not enabled us to go say guys go fish go make a paycheck and like for us there's so many crinkles in the seafood supply chain beyond our typical lobster, crab, and shrimp species. We get an opportunity to go to solve with this e-commerce direct-to-consumer model.

Ben (15m 9s):
And I guess the answer your question. It's not it's not just looking to restaurant leaders. It's looking at leaders in direct-to-consumer e-commerce grocery. So there's been so many, you know, so many resources that that either we've spoken to or research that we're sort of trying to borrow from all over the spectrum of Industries at this point.

NPR - Guy (15m 30s):
So is there Are a glut of lobsters of seafood right now is there is there's an oversupply lobsters in particular.

Luke (15m 37s):
We've avoided a bit of a mess and well prices are healthy. It's not what it was last year, but on the flip side, yes, there's a huge glut here in the state of Maine for things like oysters, which are typically consumed in in restaurants and bluefin tuna, which is almost exclusively served in restaurants. So we feel like we've got a great opportunity to showcase. Is in deliver on some of the value propositions for these other wonderful species.

NPR - Guy (16m 6s):
Give us a sense of been. I think you said something back in Matt. I think it in the Wall Street Journal you said there's no profit only survival at this point. You know that there's a whole supply chain who count on on your company to pull them through. Can you sort of explain why I mean is that because the cruise ships and the casinos and the big restaurants are not ordering Seafood that all these fishermen are going to you guys and saying hey like can you help us out? Is that basically what's happening?

Ben (16m 31s):
I mean in in some ways like for the example of this spring we started selling dayboat scallops. We've never sold them before but the guys that catch our Lobster at that time of year also go out and catch scallops and they didn't have a home for a lot of those scallops. So they say, you know, I know you normally don't buy this because you don't sell scallops in your restaurant, but I need a buyer or I don't know what I'm going to do with them. And I don't know how I'm going to make my living. During this particular season and that was what made us realize that because we were going into people's home kitchens rather than into our Shacks which aren't built to cook a variety of items.

Ben (17m 15s):
We could now have this seasonal rotation of what fishermen were catching at its absolute best. And at a time that they really needed a home for it. And yeah those conversations really sparked the Ingenuity on our side, too. Say we can you know now that we're not limited to the four walls of the Luke's Lobster Shack in Manhattan. We can actually do a whole variety of different things and rather than being restricted to only reaching folks within a short radius of our Shack we can now get them to the entire country overnight that constant interaction with fishermen and understanding what their situation was what they Hidden from us was really what what sparked our idea to Pivot away from only selling Lobster to selling this book greater variety.

NPR - Guy (18m 11s):
You know, I know that your Lobster is certified sustainable, but I guess the the Marine Stewardship Council is going to revoke Maine's the Fisheries in Maine. It's going to revoke their sustainable certification, I guess because fishermen have to go out further to get to cooler oceans cooler temperature to Cool Waters as the ocean temperature rises. And how will that impact the sustainability of what you guys do

Ben (18m 35s):
all sort of just sum it up to say the MSC Marine Stewardship Council part of their policy is that they kind of have to follow what you know, federal laws and courts are wrapped up in and so there's this awkward Court decision. It's really not relevant to Maine fisherman because all the data and evidence shows that any issues with right whales are not really not happy. In Maine Waters based on their migratory patterns and where their food is but this certification kind of gets gets lost as collateral damage in an issue. That's that's really Federal as opposed to main related.

Ben (19m 16s):
So it just means that we have to work that much harder to communicate the actual situation with lobster sustainability in Maine specifically because you know, a lot of these certification bodies. They just aren't Enough in looking at what fishery you're talking about and what issues are or aren't posed by that fishery. So, you know, it's it wasn't exactly the problem that we needed right now in the middle of covid But ultimately we know that the sustainability of the catch here isn't isn't actually a problem.

1 (19m 52s):
Here's a question from Patrice Esperanto. How is covid shifted your approach to expansion because you had really ambitious plans to expand and to build more restaurants out. Is that kind of on hold for

Ben (20m 5s):
now, as you can hear in the background? You got the bottles clanking around we're collecting the five-cent deposits. I wouldn't say it's on hold. It's something that we're starting to get reorganized around though. The restaurant business is it was tough pre covid, you know, there was a lot of competition for real estate and this whole like Amazon effective, ultimately a lot of retail going out of business created more and more. More competition for restaurants and more restaurants were sort of filling these real estate. So the whole concept of like Sheriff stomach was very very competitive. So we have escalating rents and and a lot of competition and it's horrible for the industry, but there's going to be opportunity to grow on the backside of this because they're just be a lot more more opportunity given all the

1 (20m 53s):
challenges that you faced over the last six seven months and that you will probably face for the next several months. What are some of the things you've learned about Own leadership that you want to take with you into the business in the future when this hopefully passes what are some of the things you've learned about how you lead that you want to continue to develop and

Ben (21m 13s):
maintain. Yeah, I think for me, we've always run like a very flat organization. There's no task that's ever been too small or too big for this team. But what's been nice about this crisis. Is it as the team has hard too. As a really kind of come together and problem solve on a daily weekly basis and in make decisions with 80% of the facts because that's all we're going to have. I've always been extremely appreciative team and the people here that choose to be part of this this family business. But like how we've gotten back to Our Roots around having big team meetings and making sure that any concept of like Argues sort of dismantled in a way of like transparency has been something that I really hope that we that we maintain going forward.

Ben (22m 11s):
I guess I would I would say that this has really reaffirmed the importance of the core values of the business and especially, you know, our transparency and purpose because the other one is taste and that has been maintained throughout the business and and always will be but you know, transparency that ability to speak so directly clearly and honestly with every person who touches this business inside and out is I think the number one thing that's kept us going and that's allowed us to make the right decisions and the right pivots with the right amount of input from everyone involved and I think really our investment in the purpose the reason that we're here and the If it's there were trying to create that's really guided our decision-making and it's guided how we communicate with our guests base which you know, which continues to grow online even as it shrinks in person.

Ben (23m 16s):
I just firmly believe that we're seeing a consumer that is going to make their decisions more and more on what your company is doing to better the world and I think that we need to Be louder and louder about what that is because we're not looking to go back to normal. We're looking to create a new normal. That's it's better for everyone and I think that you know this situation as really just hammered home the need for us to focus on that the cold and been kind of co-founders Luke's Lobster. Thanks guys. Thank you so much. Nice guy.

1 (23m 52s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Luke Holden and been conniff. The cofounders of Luke's Lobster to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this. And if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org and don't forget the how I built this book is now available for pre-order. You can find all the details at Gyros.com or at how I built this.com. This episode was produced by Kansas limb with help from will Mitchell Matt Adams. Gianna Kappa Dona John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

1 (24m 36s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and we'll see you back here in a few days. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR.