1 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. So have you ever thought about starting a business? And if so, what would it be? How do you come up with an idea? How do you find the money to start? How do you get the word out about your product or service? What do you do if your idea isn't working? And how do you pivot well to answer those questions. I've written a book. It's called what else how I built this and it's full of inspiring stories from some of the greatest leaders and entrepreneurs in the world who've been through the trenches made big mistakes and live to tell the tale if you're looking to start something or just want to be inspired by those who have built incredible things pick up how I built this now wherever you buy your books or by visiting Kyra's.com and thanks.

1 (52s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're coping during this very challenging time. And today we're going to hear from John Zimmer the co-founder of the ride-hailing app Lyft. We first spoke with John back in 2017, but now fast forward a few years and like most of us John is dealing with challenges. He never anticipated, but when we spoke a few days ago, he sounded Pretty optimistic

3 (1m 23s):
personally, I'm doing okay. I think you know the business has had a tough time but has seen some really strong recovery since the bottom. We were down about 75% at the peak in terms of right here rides. We've now return to a little under half down which is actually good progress. We've always been a very long-term minded company. We've had hard times before we've always been the Challenger brand and so So actually I think moments like this are opportunities for us and our team to shine and so happy to share some of that with you

1 (1m 57s):
today. Yeah, I want to I want to talk about that. I mean let's let's first talk about like kind of drill down into some of the challenges first. There's no question that this has to be the most challenging time in your you know, in your leadership of lifts. I think it's the most challenging time for any business leader founder around the world today for variety of reasons. And as you mentioned it's been a tough year for Lift. You have to have some layoffs in May I think about a thousand layoffs which Could not have been easy for you to go through. So as you began to see the pandemic having a significant impact on on your business what kinds of conversations did were you having with your leadership team with your co-founder Logan about ways to kind of begin to build resilience where the conversations

3 (2m 39s):
that we've had or one of the challenges throughout is how many different audiences groups of people that were working to take care of throughout this right? So we have our drivers we have our right. Riders we have our employees within employees. There's those that are working in person to help drivers at operation centers. And there are those that could work from home. So all different populations that we want to take care of investors as well who are judging those decisions we make so I think that's been a really interesting conversation also the conversations around short-term thinking versus long-term thinking there are short-term decisions. We need to make in order to preserve the long-term mission that we have as a company.

3 (3m 22s):
And those have been really key decisions you talked about the layoffs that was very very difficult. It forced us to make hard decisions. Some of which I think actually in hindsight were very healthy for the business, but very difficult to make especially for people that are all in this tough time where the job market is difficult. Those are not easy decisions. Let's talk about

1 (3m 43s):
some of the short-term decisions that you had to take. I mean you are a publicly traded company. So you're obviously countable to investors and it's everything. On the table, you have to review can't hide anything first of all just to keep the business operating and to get you through this time because this is going to be a challenging year and they may be a recovery next year for you. We'll talk about that a moment. But you knew this was going to be a tough year. So was one of those decisions to retain as much cash on hand was that one of the initial decisions that you guys had to take?

3 (4m 15s):
Yeah, obviously so we look at the cash that we have on hand. We also raised our first debt. To add cushion. We're actually in quite a strong position. We're lucky that we went public when we did and have you know, nearly three billion dollars in the bank. What we did to start is we ran all different scenarios. We said okay if we were 75 percent down for six months or two quarters, you know, what would the situation be like for cash if we were down, you know for four quarters, what would it be like for cash we ran, you know the worst case scenario is the medium case scenario. And the best case scenarios and then made the decision that you know raising the debt was kind of a no regrets move.

3 (4m 58s):
But then also to your point preserving the cash that we do have on hand making decisions about expenses that we had in the office that were more of a luxury making decisions around certain teams that we needed to tighten up for example on the operating side. There were some markets where we had to close some of our centers.

1 (5m 18s):
What are you finding out from users like why? What is what is it that is preventing them from using lift. Is it basically that they just don't have anywhere to go or is it is it the fear of being in a car with somebody else? It's a mix of both. You know first. I think

3 (5m 32s):
it's people changing their transportation Behavior their actual Transportation behavior, and then secondarily, it's obviously the the questions around health safety, and I'd love to walk through what we're doing on that end as you open the app. We asked both driver and Rider to confirm that they're wearing a mask. We ask driver writer confirmed that they haven't been in contact with anyone. One that has covid and we ask everyone to keep their areas clean and open Windows if possible. So that's gone a long way. I mean if you if you zoom out actually the fact that half as many rides are being taken now as before. I'm actually quite happy with in a strange way because I know many people that are they're not going into the office.

3 (6m 12s):
So that's a huge change in transportation. So the fact that one out of two rides are still present even in this environment shows some flexibility in the model because Seen different types of rides we've seen a lot of essential workers using this way more because there are other options potentially public transportation are things that they're more concerned about from a health safety perspective. And so we've seen those rides

1 (6m 35s):
increase mean one of the things that you you did before the pandemic was to diversify me lift invested in Bike Share programs and in the scooter programs in certain urban areas around the country given that the Rideshare part of your business is still the core. Part of your business what our conversations you're having internally about creating other revenue streams in the future to you know, if ride sure doesn't recover as quickly as you hope or expect or if you know if Rideshare is is a completely different thing in the future. What what other kind of places are you looking to diversify?

3 (7m 10s):
Yeah. So I mean the good news is transportation is fundamental and is something that through the recovery is going to be important and people will need so one on bikes. You know, we own the System City bike in New York City BeyWheelz in the bay Divi and Chicago and you can access them through lift and for City bike in New York. I believe it was last weekend. We hit our record of over over a hundred thousand rides in one day. And so we're actually seeing faster recovery and and not as deep down side on those modes, which has been really helpful. The other area we've looked at is delivery. So we have no intention to be another kind of food delivery.

3 (7m 51s):
Consumer app, we will not do that. But there's a lot of small and local businesses that are having to pay 30% 20% of their revenue to be on those platforms. And so we think there's a huge opportunity to help those small and local businesses have their own kind of capabilities and provide more jobs for drivers. So we're experimenting with that. We started that with essential deliveries. We've worked with Partners to deliver millions of meals for people in need during this time. So I think that's another really interesting opportunity on the driver's side.

1 (8m 26s):
I want to ask you about an initiative that you recently put out. I think it's called resilient streets where you asked urban planners to sketch out plans for what cities will look like with fewer cars basically, you know city streets that are designed for more bikes and he's scooters and e-bikes and so on. I mean it's interesting because you know, your business model depends on cars and ride shares so well. Take me through the thinking behind this and how did that affect your business model in the

3 (8m 54s):
future? Yeah. So if you zoom out and you think about our mission improve people's lives with the world's best transportation from the beginning. We looked at the fact that Americans spend nine thousand dollars every year owning and operating a car that they use for percent of the time they spend more money on their car than they do on food than they do on Health Care. The only thing they spend more money on then their cars their house and to us that doesn't make any sense. So we want to create a

1 (9m 21s):
All

3 (9m 22s):
new way for people to Access Transportation because we think by doing that we can allow cities to be built around people instead of car ownership. Right? We have so much parking everywhere studies show when you build more streets you get more traffic and so especially in a moment like now when you can rethink everything where that you're forced to rethink everything thinking about Street designers is critical, you know, we have the bikes as I And across the country there would be a lot more people using bikes if there was safe bike infrastructure. There would be a lot more people walking and enjoying local Commerce and cities if it was always safe for pedestrians and there was easy access throughout the city there is going to be transportation in cars in vehicles that will always be important but the infrastructure needed whether that's parking or the number of streets that we have or the lack of Safe Streets for bikes.

3 (10m 22s):
Pedestrians needs to

1 (10m 23s):
change so I mean, could you imagine a future where the bulk of your business comes from? People using bicycles Andy scooters and other modes of Transport. I think it like a very

3 (10m 34s):
Urban core. I mean Manhattan is a great example. I forget the average speed of a car in Manhattan gets like it's like seven miles an hour's in the single digits. It's not very impressive. So in urban cores micro Mobility or bikes and scooters as those Vehicles get Better and better and safer and safer. And as the street infrastructure adopts to make the environment safer absolutely. It can be the best way the fastest way the cleanest way and the most enjoyable way to get around your City. All right, let's get to some questions John

1 (11m 4s):
actually Madeline Chen had a question that I think we just answered. Her question was is list considering diversifying Beyond ride-sharing transportation. And what

3 (11m 12s):
other if it's okay what other mode that we've been really excited to launch or to grow even in this environment has been a rental service that we created. So car rentals as we get people out of car ownership, there are use cases. If you go away on a weekend on a you know, two hour drive and you don't own a car having easy access to a car rental is important. So with lift rentals, you get a lift to the car rental location that we operate and then you can just grab the keys and go there's no counter. It's a really fast and easy and covid we launched a kind of contact list experience to get the car. We also announced a partnership with 6th. Which the European carbons operator such that we brought that technology and that access through our app to their vehicles as well.

1 (11m 59s):
This is a question from Kyle Ashcraft from Facebook. I'll ask what do you see as the future for subscription-based ride-sharing. I know we talked about that at the how I built the summit which was you division for in the future, you know, people have subscriptions for bikes and for E Scooters and for Lift rides. What what's the status of that?

3 (12m 18s):
Yeah. I love that question. We have a program called. Lift pink which is our subscription service.

1 (12m 25s):
And so you pay a monthly

3 (12m 26s):
fee to get a 15% discount on all right here arrives as well as access to bikes and scooters were even testing unlimited access to bikes and scooters. So this is live, you know, we're going to be testing, you know upgrades on your car rental. So by having all these different consumer Transportation options lift pink can become your transportation wallet can become the most affordable. A way to Access

1 (12m 52s):
Transportation when we come back in just a moment. I'll ask John about one of the biggest debates in the world of ride-hailing whether drivers should be thought of as independent contractors or employees stay with us. I'm guy rise and you're listening to how I built this resilient Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org.

1 (13m 33s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition and I'm speaking with John Zimmer of lift. And you may have seen the company in the news this summer because it's been lobbying hard for a California ballot initiative called proposition 22 and I'm oversimplifying here. But basically if it passes it will overturn a state law that would require companies like uber and Lyft to treat their drivers as W to employees not contractors, but as you can imagine The issue his pretty heated a lot of people have our anger and all sides of this their drivers who support the initiative drivers who oppose initiative consumers who support and oppose it.

1 (14m 15s):
So first of all, can you explain from your perspective? Why would it be so hard to treat your drivers like part time and place? Well, I think first it started with the

3 (14m 23s):
fact that many of our drivers already have full-time work the majority something like 80% of our drivers maybe in California to 86 percent of drivers drive less than NT hours a week. This is something someone does maybe five hours a week 10 hours a week. Yes, of course. There's people that are doing it 40 hours a week, but the far majority are doing it less and I think it's important to zoom out and have the Nuance part of the conversation which is what do we want to accomplish? What is the right thing to do here? The right thing to do is to get benefits for drivers depending on how much they work. If you're going to drive for five hours for three months to save money for a wedding or for a medical expense.

3 (15m 3s):
The way we're being you know forced into employment would make that not tenable. And so what we're saying is okay. So let's look at this new form of work. Let's not ignore that these drivers deserve benefits, but let's have the benefits scale with the amount of work that we do and so prop 22, is that middle ground or saying here's a better solution that provides health care for drivers driving, you know, 15 hours or greater.

1 (15m 26s):
So just to clarify me your position is we don't oppose providing benefits to people who drive for Lift, but we want to be able to scale those. So if you drive more we want to be able to offer those benefits, but you're essentially saying you don't want the state to legislating regulate and force you to do

3 (15m 42s):
this. No, I mean, we're not you know, the type of company that says that is against regulations. We think regulations make a lot of sense. We think labor protections make a lot of sense. I think the labor movement in this country. It has been critical for workers in America off and I think we have a new form of work that five years ago. I went to Accounts on said how can we get benefits to drivers that are driving more on the platform? And she said well, you would have to classify everyone as an employee and then eighty to ninety percent of drivers likely wouldn't be able to drive on the platform. And so we've been trying to find a portable benefit type structure for a while for to One driver support prop 22 versus the alternative and so we've heard their voices and we've Incorporated that into prop

1 (16m 30s):
22 when you go to Sacramento Though when you make this argument to legislators, you know, what is it that you're not able to convince them of

3 (16m 37s):
the politics honestly, so I've not only spoken to legislators and politicians. I've talked to labor leaders listened and provided this Viewpoint listen to drivers listen to all these constituents and

1 (16m 52s):
the majority. If not all agreed to a certain

3 (16m 55s):
extent. The challenges is political. We're living in a time where nuanced opinions and non extreme opinions. Are harder to to legislate are harder to get through and so there's like a political survival aspect. And so we have to be part of creating the political conditions by having drivers have a voice demonstrating that drivers 421 want this verse the alternative demonstrating the true consequences of 80% of people at least articulating them and hoping not to demonstrate them in practice. But I think the challenges have been it's been hypothetical because it hasn't been real and because political conversations favor kind of extreme opposing views versus kind of nuanced

1 (17m 40s):
compromise me. I wonder if we're kind of in a moment where you know, people are sort of fed up with this idea of trusting businesses, right? I mean in a sense what you're saying is hey, you know, we operate in good faith. We can be trusted to operate as a responsible employer and as a responsible business because the market is going to judge us users won't use us if we're not doing that in that makes sense. But at the same Time, you know, we're at a moment. Now where people have heard that message in the past and haven't seen it. Right. They haven't seen a realist.

3 (18m 10s):
I don't think people trust businesses and I don't think that's crazy. I'm not saying trust us

1 (18m 17s):
I'm saying, let's legislate a

3 (18m 19s):
solution that works. Well for drivers works. Well for Riders works. Well for the business works well for labor, you know, the same thing happened in the early days of lift when seven eight years ago, it was wild to get into someone else's our it was absolutely something that people said would not happen and we started doing background checks. We started doing driving record checks before there was a rule to do it and I did used to have that philosophy of oh, well look, we're doing it, you know trust us, but then I I learned quickly and I went to the regular and I said, you know, we received a cease-and-desist and I said look, like here's what we're doing, but don't take my word for it regulate this and that led to the state law in California now known as like the TNC.

3 (19m 2s):
D'accord and that got brought across the country. So I agree with you. I think people are fed up listening to not only businesses but leaders saying trust me and I'm not it's not what I'm saying. I'm saying listen to the drivers and let's create a new regulation. All right, let's get to some more

1 (19m 17s):
questions about lift this from Daniel Kramer Daniel asks, are you gonna start to focus more on autonomous vehicles in part because of covid does that change that equation for you at all? We have been working on autonomous vehicles. We have a program called level 5.

3 (19m 31s):
We have a great team. We're making great progress. We also have kind of a partnership model called open network where we've partnered with way Mo and others to bring those vehicles to lift Riders. We actually have some of those in Arizona. So this hasn't changed that. I mean, I think of course the ability to create, you know health safety through autonomous is definitely quite interesting and through designing the vehicle, but it's still a technology limitation and a cost limitation at this point. And so those haven't changed.

1 (20m 2s):
Materially during this time. Here's a question from William Curtis says, he's a part-time Lyft driver. He wants to know when lift will require all Riders to upload a photo of themselves for drivers to see

3 (20m 14s):
I love that question every year at least once I drive on the platform and I was driving and I do it on New Year's and I was doing it this past New Year's and had the same thing happen where a rider came with it without a photo and then a rider came with a photo and it was such a more delightful and obviously You know safe feeling experience when you have the photo and right after that, which is the reason I drive and I will try to do it more frequently right after that had a conversation with the team about improving the rate of photos uploaded. We don't want it to be a Blocker in the sense that we don't want to get less rides which would be less income earning opportunities for you and the company but we have increased the percent of riders that are posting a photo and we're working on more features to kind of encourage that while they're in the right.

3 (21m 2s):
Simply take a selfie and things like that. So I agree and and expect more from us on

1 (21m 7s):
that just for clarification here when you when you actually are Lyft driver yourself when you are out there and it says John and I'm assuming you're on your Toyota Highlander. By the way, do we just upgraded to a minivan Honda Odyssey? All right. So if you see a John driving a Honda Odyssey, you know that it's going to be the co-founder of lift who's driving you around and then you can you can ask him any questions you want. You know a lot of people ask whether now is a good time to start a business. I mean you started what would become lift during the last financial crisis in 2008 with Logan your co-founder who you met on Facebook. Do you think that economic downturns are good moments to start businesses.

1 (21m 48s):
I think

3 (21m 49s):
so for two reasons one depending on the individual your risk profile might be you know, the job market might not be as good. And so there may be less risk to taking that risk and starting your own thing, but maybe even more importantly In the things are changing the world is changing business is changing people's preferences and needs are changing and those are all opportunities. And so I think now is a great time to be an entrepreneur

1 (22m 16s):
John you talked about Logan your co-founder and I think we're super close friend of yours as being very kind of deliberate and methodical and you're kind of slightly more emotional and which is a great balance to have and I mean you talked about how you You're you were the one who was like kind of freaking out when things weren't quite going right and I mean now, you know, you're a big public company, you're valued at billions of dollars and despite. Obviously the huge challenges you have this year. Are you able to kind of manage stress better or actually are do you still have sleepless nights? Do you still have anxiety even even now

3 (22m 54s):
still have lots of anxiety but much better, I guess with the the few years and the kind of experiences. We've had with lift to manage that for me. Exercise helps a lot. It helps me get out of my head spending time with my daughters. I have a four-year-old and a one-year-old and that is incredibly grounding. They say something funny to me. You know, I have to change a diaper or whatever. It is incredibly grounding and and frankly brings joy to a tough day to kind of spend time with them. So that's been helpful as well.

1 (23m 25s):
The last question for you when we when we spoke at the summit that had built the summit 2018. I asked you but you mentioned how you and you and Logan off. Often ask yourselves if we were starting over today what we do differently now that we are here in this very challenging moment. If you were starting over today, what would you do differently?

3 (23m 43s):
Oh man using my question against me, it's good. I think if we were starting over today, I might start with pink which we talked about as the subscription as a way to get people to interact with lift to say. Hey, there's a membership service. It's going to be more affordable than owning a car. And we're going to go to battle for you to build the best transportation experience to give you access to bikes cars car rental. So I probably maybe start from Pink and work work

1 (24m 14s):
backwards. Nice John Zimmer co-founder president of lift. Thank you so much. Thank you. That's an excerpt from my conversation with John Zimmer to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com NPR and if you want to find out more about the resilient series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Matt Adams L Manion Gianna, Kappa, Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney need Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you back here in a few days.

1 (24m 54s):
I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.