Guy Raz (14s):
Hey, it's Guy here. And before we start the show, I just want to tell you about the how I built this book. It's coming out in just a few weeks. But if you preorder before September 30th, I will send you a signed book plate for free if you love this show. So if you love the stories you hear on it, if you're inspired by them, if you're looking to start a new business or just thinking about it. Well, you may want to check out the how I built this book. It's full of inspiration ideas stories and insights pre-order your copy of how I built this by visiting Guy Raz.com or how I built this.com for more details.

Guy Raz (55s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and Business Leaders about how they're adapting to these difficult Economic Times and on today's show. We're going to hear from Brian Chesky the CEO and co-founder of Airbnb back in 2016. We spoke with Brian's co-founder Joe gebbia, and he told the amazing story of how they founded and built the company and if you haven't heard it, be sure to check it out now, of course. We are in a very different time and a few months ago Brian wrote a letter to the entire staff of Airbnb letting them know that 25% of the company was going to be laid off.

Brian Chesky (1m 37s):
This has been by far for us the most difficult thing that we've experienced since we started the company. It doesn't years ago. I think Joe and I used to talk about how starting Airbnb basically this idea that like strange the live each other with each other like that was the hardest thing we were ever going to do. It was like pushing. The rock up the hill and it turned out that trying to run a company that does travel preparing to go public in the middle of pandemic is about as hard and and then doing it all via Zoom. It was even more difficult and I think that what people want right now just more fundamentally its connection isn't that like the thing that we've always wanted we want connection to each other and and now you have to fight for it, you know, you have to make a conscious effort for it get on the one hand.

Brian Chesky (2m 21s):
I'm closer to some people and I've ever been in my life, you know. Closer to my co-founders Joanne date we talk all the time and when you're going through crazy periods of time, it has a way of bringing you closer together, but also as a way of making your bubble a little bit smaller and that's probably what's happened

Guy Raz (2m 37s):
for me. Yeah, you you wrote a letter to your employees that is posted publicly. And that letter is this remarkable. It was so transparent you had to lay off a quarter of your employees in May and you could see how painful it was for you to write that letter it was extremely Only transparent you described the process for how you had to make that hard decision. But also, you know that every employee would receive 14 weeks of pay plus Severance and insurance for a year and they get to keep their laptops and they were resources to help the employees kind of walk me through how you how you came to write that letter and how you kind of dealt with that just emotionally.

Brian Chesky (3m 23s):
Yeah, there is No Playbook, I don't think to lay people off and that's the kind of thing that if there was a Playbook you should never use it because the thing that people want more than anything they want Humanity they want compassion and that means that you need to treat people like people like individually and not robotically, you know, when the with a crisis happened we felt it in mid-march. It was pretty serious. We spent 12 years building Airbnb and then we lost 80% of the business in eight weeks. You know, we're like one of the success stories, right and then suddenly eight weeks. There's you know, all sorts of concerns.

Brian Chesky (4m 4s):
There's articles will earn me survive. I never thought I'd read an article like that and we made a lot of hard decisions. We first cut enormous amount of cost. We cut over a billion dollars of plan marketing spend then we quickly raised two billion dollars. It's not easy to raise two billion dollars. It's more difficult to raise two billion dollars from your travel company. Any it's a pandemic and you've lost 80% your business in like eight weeks the people get nervous. Thankfully we have some great investors step up but we had to do that deal that was like over the course of 72 hours to like get that deal done. It was the fastest deal. I think by certainly I've ever done and they've ever done. So before that layoffs even happened, I wrote a couple principles and I said, I we only have a hunt the handful of stakeholders.

Brian Chesky (4m 49s):
We have to first make sure that we act quickly and with all stakeholders in We're going to be remembered probably for how we handle this crisis Andy Grove. This famous entrepreneur said bad comes destroyed by a crisis good company survival prices and great companies Thrive or are defined by if Isis. I said, we're not going to be the kind of company would be destroyed by this. So we're going to obviously try to take care of each of our steric stakeholders. And when we got to the employees, we basically had exhausted options having raised two billion dollars. We came to the conclusion that we would have to do lay off when we confronted too hard truth. The hard truth number one was this that we did not know when tribal would return nobody did and the second thing we knew is that when travel would return it would look fundamentally different than the travel before the pandemic and so our business would have to look different and we have to change that shape of our business and what we focused on and so then we just realized that we had to approach this with a sense of humanity.

Brian Chesky (5m 52s):
I said we should be you know as generous as Possibly could be and not less generous than that. Why would you do that? And so we came up with a handful of things that we did to try to help people in this very difficult time. We did a 14 weeks Severance puts a week per your service. We felt like well, this is a Health crisis people need health insurance. And so we made sure that everyone had at least one year of health insurance. Even after getting laid off one of the things that I'm most proud of that our team came up with Joe and the team came to me and they They said you know what? We have a recruiting team. Maybe we could dedicate a percentage of the recruiting team to fight do job outplacement for the people being laid off.

Brian Chesky (6m 34s):
Maybe we could basically be an outplacement team to help them find jobs. And the last thing I'll say is writing the letter. I just really wanted to make sure I was just brutally honest with them. But I also like, you know a lot of times the problem with these things is there's a certain way to act and to certain way to act is a way where you kind of like you're not vulnerable. Yeah, you don't take too much responsibility and I was like, you know, the one thing people want to know is that leaders have compassion because at this period of time if leaders don't have compassion then we are all in a very precarious situation and compassion means actually having heart actually things Business Leaders do have heart. It's just that they sometimes have trouble showing heart and so I use the word like love in a letter with with to a layoff and it's kind of something very few people do but I don't think it's something very few people.

Brian Chesky (7m 25s):
Feel it's just that the conventions of business get really cold. But now I think it's pretty obvious that people do want to feel

Guy Raz (7m 32s):
something. I mean 1900 employees had to be laid off, but you still have a large Workforce. How are you making sure that you're keeping morale among the people who who are still working at our B&B?

Brian Chesky (7m 43s):
Oh, it's so hard. I was warned ahead of time that not only is the layoff going to be difficult. But the months after a layoff when you can't even gather people that gets even more difficult. One of the things I've done is for the last Five months I do a weekly kind of QA. I said no matter what question you asked I office iMac and Scott like this, you know what the camera got his little green light next to it. I'm going to stare into that green light every week now, I just tell you everything that I can and that's going to be our point of connection. I tell people you're not alone. We're going to go on this together and I think that the key is you have to be optimistic and optimism is not blind hope but there are a lot of reasons to be optimistic and I when I was a kid My dad used to say to me things are Never As Good as they see him in this bad as they seem.

Brian Chesky (8m 30s):
Well if that's true things weren't may be as good as they seemed in January, but that also probably means things aren't as bad as they seem here in July. I'm seeing the humanity of people the love that's come through the surface any you started only now in a crisis we're reminded of some of the things that are most essential and those things that are most essential are not the things that come in cardboard boxes to our front door. At that is essential is a relationships that we have with people. That's what we have the in the day.

Guy Raz (8m 60s):
Let's talk about the travel industry Brian and let's talk optimism for a moment. You know, when we told the Airbnb story on the show you had a lot of moments of Despair a lot of trucks of Sorrow, originally you and your partner sent out 20 emails to investors to invest and not a single one invest in your company. You had several setbacks trying to stand up air B&B in 2008-2009. At one point you made cereal a box of cereal to get attention and I think you raised $20,000 with the sale of those cereal boxes.

Brian Chesky (9m 34s):
Yeah, it's 20 or 30,000. It was yeah something like that Joe told the story we have to raise collectible breakfast here. We were are bed and breakfast. So we said well, let's do collectible breakfast seal for the Democratic Republican national conventions in 2008, Joe and I we made these Obama over there were Cheerios and Captain McCain's a Maverick and every bite and At one point where like literally hot glowing the cereal boxes and our kitchen. I remember wondering I wonder if Mark Zuckerberg ever had to like hot gluing cereal boxes in his kitchen start Facebook. Of course, the answer was not this was an ominous sign but kind of we lived

Guy Raz (10m 9s):
through so I mean clearly there were times in the founding this company where you were really coming up with different creative ideas and trying different things out to see what worked. What's that version of the of the cereal box now what are some of the things that You are doing as a business to get creative and to think about building resilience.

Brian Chesky (10m 31s):
When the pandemic hit we said we are going to be decisive felt like if I was a captain of a ship the felt like suddenly something hit the side of the ship and you had to move very very quickly. And so it was kind of all hands on deck. First thing is we had over we had customers cancel over 1 billion dollars of reservations. Now this would already have been hard except for the fact that this was a billion dollars that are Most were expecting and these people many of them depend on to pay the rent or mortgage if we had a huge predicament. What do you do when a billion people want a billion dollars or refunds and another group of people tell you what if you don't get that billion dollars, then we're going to be in a really bad spot. Well, that's a really bad no-win situation because not our money.

Brian Chesky (11m 14s):
We just hold the money. What we decided to do is we refunded all stays related to the pandemic where people need the cancellation of can travel but then this causes a huge shortfall with our Most and we're bleeding cash at this point. Like I never never in our history have we bled cash? In fact, we need more money in the bank. Then we raised before the pandemic suddenly. We're losing a lot of money. We took quarter of a billion dollars two hundred fifty million dollars and we sent it to our hosts just didn't loan it. Just sent it to host. You know, they would have needed even more but it was the most we could do then our employees rose up they offered up to a million dollars of their own money through like things like perks and travel credits to give to our host and Joan and I I said well, let's add a zero to that.

Brian Chesky (11m 56s):
We got that the 10 million dollars. We created a little special grant program then suddenly. We noticed that there were nurses EMTs and doctors and they were going into hot zones and you place to stay host for telling us. Hey, we can host these people and we created this program called Frontline stays to provide housing for Frontline workers. We had more than a hundred thousand host list their homes for a discount. We waive fees. Some of the homes were free. So we've been trying to be adaptable, you know. Suddenly the last thing I'll say is the following our business drops by 80% in eight weeks and we thought well, this is going to be a really really long road and it is but something remarkable happened businesses started seeing glimmers of Hope and recovery and what ended up happening is people weren't getting on planes.

Brian Chesky (12m 44s):
They weren't Crossing Borders and they weren't traveling for business. But you know what they were doing they were saying I need to get out of the house and there were getting out of car. They were driving to remote destination within about 200. Miles and staying at an Airbnb and so we've seen a major surgeon bookings in non-urban areas small towns rural communities people staying longer

Hubspot (13m 6s):
people saying if I'm going to work from home when I just work for many home, right and they get that at home on Airbnb. So it's a totally different world than I think I mean the maybe the most fundamental change that I see in our world that's going to happen. If you're so fortunate enough tip eclis upper middle class person or upper class not everyone. Can do this but for those who can they're realizing maybe I'll go a month here. Maybe I'll go month there and you're seeing not only population redistribution the ghosting travel redistribution that all these new communities are really welcoming guests and they're going to welcome them for a longer period of time that is a fundamental change in our industry when we come back in just a moment. Brian tells us more about the travel Trends. We might start seeing this fall and how air B&B will try to respond to them. Stay with us. I'm guy right And you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from HubSpot complex enterprise software shouldn't get in the way of doing good work. However spots marketing Hub Enterprise makes it incredibly easy to do powerful things launch campaigns quickly from a user-friendly interface improve performance using Ai and attribute Revenue to every marketing activity with HubSpot. You can spend more time delighting your customers and less time. managing software discover all the new features in marketing Hub Enterprise at HubSpot.com Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition earlier this year Airbnb experienced an eighty percent drop in business. But CEO Brian Chesky says that people are traveling again. They're just not getting

Guy Raz (14m 58s):
on planes and they're staying much closer to home

Brian Chesky (15m 2s):
people are going to instead of traveling to the same 20 cities going the same Hotel districts. They're really crowded and then standing in line to get their selfie photo instead of same landmarks to put it on Instagram. Look, I got that too. They're going to have to make some different choices and maybe those won't be so bad. After all what they're going to do is we're going to travel Outdoors. For example, there's 400 national parks United States, right most Americans live within a tank of gas of a national park and National Parks have historically not been the main way people travel. They go to Miami. They go to Vegas, you know, they go to Times Square. Well, I think that if this is a time of reconnection, you know, maybe this is the time reconnection to family.

Brian Chesky (15m 43s):
This is also could be a time to connection with nature and the outdoors for a lot of people. I mean, where are we seeing huge growth cabins are streams camping. This is that's the kind of travel that you're going to see. I think this is going to just change Trends. I think people are going to want to kind of reconnect to Nature. This is a big

Guy Raz (16m 0s):
trench. I mean, yeah, I mean are you seeing I mean we're seeing a world where you know, it's impossible to get an RV

Brian Chesky (16m 7s):
totally. We're totally booked out for

Guy Raz (16m 8s):
these and and so is there sort of a future scenario where Air B&B more aggressively gets into the business of our

Brian Chesky (16m 15s):
Is oh, yeah a hundred percent. I mean, I don't even know how many thousands of RVs are on Airbnb right now. I'm gonna have to look but we're probably without having intended to be in that business. We're probably one of the largest the largest RV rental companies in the world. It's not as they're not our RVs the communities but yeah, I'm sure thousands and thousands of Arby's we have thousands of treehouses thousands of air streams thousands of years thousands of houseboats, and I think that people are discovering Unique one-of-a-kind. They want things that are more intimate more local and one of the cool things about Airbnb is like the most insane space that you ever imagined. These a frame homes are these like really interesting architectural gems?

Brian Chesky (16m 58s):
They're saying I want to go somewhere with an interesting home. This home is in the middle of blank and that's really cool looking and so you're starting to see some really interesting homes and Airbnb being booked there. There is a giant boot that you can sleep in and New Zealand somebody built a giant boot. It's like a 15-5 There is a dog that you sleep in this called the dog bark Park BMB of like a 20-foot High dog, and it's the DMV and I think in Idaho and it's got a waiting list now.

Guy Raz (17m 27s):
Yeah, I mean look all of these examples are awesome and exciting. This is a question. I love this question from chippy. I'm have you guys considered having a category of like house is suitable for work from home or quarantined homes, like a like a little a category for those

Brian Chesky (17m 42s):
things. I love that we have not done it yet, but Love the idea. I feel like this is a good sign that we should do it. One of the things we now do is for example, we your internet speed never met it mattered more F in your life. That's right now, right like one of the things is making sure that people know the Wi-Fi speed so over a thousand hosts have already updated the speed of their Wi-Fi on their airbnb's we want to get hundreds of thousands host just to update what kind of Internet do you have what the speed of your Wi-Fi? What's the buffering rate just because some people like they have work where they need to rely on it and then we're going to ask Ask like in reviews to confirm like Wi-Fi speed so really basic things like that. Yeah, you kind of took for granted before we ask. Do you have Wi-Fi now?

Brian Chesky (18m 23s):
It's like well how fast is the Wi-Fi because it really matters to

Guy Raz (18m 25s):
people I have to assume like with the hotel industry in the travel industry a significant part of your business does come from business Travelers, right and and presumably your business is still significantly lower this year this time this year than it was last

Brian Chesky (18m 38s):
year. It's not no, it's not awesome. If going

Guy Raz (18m 40s):
not significantly. Wow, so you're seeing you're already seeing sort of similar. First right now than you were last

Brian Chesky (18m 46s):
year. Yes. So drop by about 80% and I mean, you know, nobody knows that this is pent-up demand or not. But know we're around last year's levels all around the world are averaged out, you know, Latin America and Asia are lower North America and Europe are higher.

Guy Raz (19m 2s):
Wow, and that's because people aren't getting on planes

Brian Chesky (19m 5s):
mix shift from hotels to homes. I mean if you're in a city and you want to go out of the city to a small community the smaller the community less likely they have a hotel because a hotel only works with Density right you need a bunch of rooms and you deficiency and so people are basically traveling and going to small communities. Well, it turns out that's actually a really good use case for a home and we try to be very responsible. We work with local governments to have reopening protocols. We hired or brought on the form birth certificate on United States that Mercy you have create a cleaning protocol and then people don't want to be in crowds and they perceive our B&B. Is this a safer option?

Guy Raz (19m 40s):
Yeah. We're getting questions about that from from our listeners. I mean in terms of cleanliness, how do How do you ensure that the hosts are keeping their properties cleans up with this a question for Mary Elliott Coughlin our via Facebook. How do you guys make sure that the hosts are really sanitizing their

Brian Chesky (19m 56s):
homes? Yeah. So this is the whole program that we're doing we launched this thing called the enhanced screening protocol. We asked host to go through basically like an online course if they go through the course, it's got like basic cleaning protocols. They get a badge or a seal on their listing you'll see it and it says right below the listing. I think it's an enhanced cleaning. Protocol, we've created gaps between checkouts and check-ins of about 24 hours to make sure that obviously there's some Gap and people aren't kind of interfacing with each other. These are some of the things and now we're working on other things like updating review system. So when people stay they can rate the cleanliness and to the host seemed very responsive and then we're going to be working on ways to essentially verify the standard of cleanliness of well, that's a little bit harder problem, but there's a whole system

Guy Raz (20m 44s):
that we're working on you. To this point of going public. I mean is that on the back burner now of taking the company public?

Brian Chesky (20m 51s):
No, I've when this interview is over. I will be resuming work on that. I to go public you've got to write this Securities document called an s-1 and it's like a 300-page page-turner. It's it will not it will not compete with your favorite American literature as the Sunday night reading, but we were going to file it later. March we put on the shelf and recently we've been dusting it off, you know and and get the update it because the business has changed. So you've got to kind of write it more difficult more differently. So that's what I'm doing and we don't know when we'll be public but I basically said will be ready this year if the markets ready for us if the markets not ready, we'll be ready when they are

Guy Raz (21m 34s):
Brian, you know, when you think about where your business is going to be in five years and and what you've learned from this time, you know as a leader. It's been really difficult. It's been extremely Challenging your sort of wearing your vulnerability on your sleeve which I think a lot of people appreciate. What do you want to take with you into the future in five years time from now that you've really learned about yourself and your leadership and your company during this time period,

Brian Chesky (21m 60s):
you know, you can learn a lot about somebody in a crisis and I learned two things about myself first thing I've learned about myself is I can handle a lot more pain than I thought. I could it just turns out that like whatever I was afraid of I think and this is Ooh for so many of us whatever happens. I think we can get through it because we're generally not alone. I think sometimes people listening. They probably feel alone. I bet you everyone's less alone. They think they are but we're actually together everything's connected. We're all connected. If you kind of lean on the support of those around you you can handle so much more than you think you do. I mean most people listening do have connections in that. We just need to remind ourselves that them and reach out to them.

Brian Chesky (22m 42s):
And the second thing I've learned is to Foliar your own heart your own intuition, you know before pandemic Airbnb was stretched thin we're sprawling we're going into all these businesses, you know, just kind of feeling pressure of trying to make everyone happy and the pressure of trying to do everything and trying to make everyone happy kind of makes everyone not really happy at all and then suddenly something happens you're in a crisis and you can no longer make what I call business decisions. So then you shift to something else and that's what I call principle based decisions. If you can't predict where the world's going just right out the principles of what you stand for and have faith knowing if you do the right thing that it's going to sort itself out.

Brian Chesky (23m 26s):
And by the way, what's your alternative at this point anyway, and so I started realizing that like we need to get back to the basics. When you get back to Roots back to what is truly special about Ur B and B, which is connecting people but about belonging because we didn't start this company to be a travel company. We didn't start this company be a Real estate company it was about connection and if it took a crisis for us to get back to that core truth, then that's what we're going to focus on. We're not alone and we all have something the world needs and we need to focus on that. That's

Guy Raz (23m 57s):
what we take out of this. Yes indeed Brian Chesky. Thank you so much for joining us.

Brian Chesky (24m 2s):
Thank you very much.

Guy Raz (24m 3s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Brian Chesky CEO and co-founder of Airbnb to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual and PR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Tyra Lockhart Matt Adams, Gianna, Kappa, Dona, John Isabella, Julia Kearney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days.

Guy Raz (24m 44s):
I'm Guy Raz. And you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.