2 (0s):
Hey everyone, so as some of you know, we've just started a new series of conversations on Facebook live. Where each week. I'll be talking to Founders and entrepreneurs about how they're dealing with the new normal that we're all experiencing right now, and in case you miss these conversations live, we're going to be posting an excerpt right here every Thursday in your podcast feed and today. We've got two guests later. You'll hear from Tristan Walker the founder of Walker & Company, but first, let's start with David Neil Elman the founder of JetBlue Airways. The airline industry has taken a huge hit over these past few weeks and it's likely are carriers won't be flying at capacity for the foreseeable future now David is no longer involved with JetBlue, but he has founded to other airlines since then one is called Azul.

2 (46s):
And it's one of the biggest air carriers in South America. So of course covid-19 has had a direct impact on his business, but David is confident people will fly again and that his airline will survive this crisis.

1 (1m 0s):
You know our business is off 95% We had nine hundred flights a day before the crisis were down to under 50 flights a day. Well our Revenue we were doing something close to 10 million a day. Now, we're doing you know five percent of that. So, you know, it's it's a it's a big Challenge and but you know, one of the great things, you know, when you build great companies you have great people, you know, we have about 13,000 people who work for for a soul and so we went out to the to the Group and said, hey, you know everybody we're going to need your help here who would like to take a few months off without pay and remarkably enough.

1 (1m 40s):
We had almost 10,000 of our people say we love this company. We want to say this company. So we're going to we're going to bow out for a few months, which is astounding and it just says everything about about our people and you know, I think that gives me great. Hope that you know, we're going to be back and we're gonna be back strong. Because these people are truly amazing and it makes me all more the resolve to really say those jobs every single one of them and make sure that they're all back to work, you know soon

2 (2m 10s):
as possible David what's your sense of sort of the domestic Airline situation? I mean we're talking about potentially months many months of very very little air travel. Do you think that domestic carriers are going to survive this,

1 (2m 26s):
you know, our major expenses that we have are obviously our crew members. You know are salaried folks. That's number one. Number two is fuel. We're not flying so we don't have that expense and number three is obviously the cost of our aircraft. We have great business partners people who have provided separately as they know the position were in so we're not burning fuel, you know, a lot of our salaries have been reduced and those that Supply our planes for us have said they don't pay us for six months. We're good, you know, will you catch up to catch us up later and they know it's cancer. In addition to that moving to the u.s. To your question of u.s. You know, the aid package that was given to the airline's was was fifty billion dollars, right?

1 (3m 9s):
No, that's a lot and it was done for a reason. So there were some strings attached to the to the aid that was given number one. It said that you have to you have to pay your people through the end of September and you can't lay anybody off. So that's where a good portion of that money is going to go. It's going to pay salaries for these people. The second thing is they said you need to maintain service to us to a minimal level. Well to the cities that you had service to and so we have a lot of flights flying around with really few or no people on it some cases, you know, these are lines were very strong financially before the for the crisis. You know, I was talking to one, you know Airline executive in us and they said, you know, we're probably going to be 25% smaller if we come back in a few months, but this goes for a year.

1 (3m 54s):
We could be 50% smaller more so you can imagine I mean just one and one major airline employees it Thousand people and so it's critical that we get this right and we figure out not only how to how to deal with this issue. But we figure out how to stay with it as opposed to always having this threat of shutdown open up shut down.

2 (4m 14s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with David Neelam and founder of JetBlue Airways and Azul Airlines. If you want to see our whole conversation, you can check it out at facebook.com slash how I built this so another industry that's been heavily impacted by the covid-19 crisis. This is the beauty industry salons and barbershops and particular places that require human connection and touch Tristan Walker is the founder of Walker & Company. You might have heard his episode on how I built this and they make shaving Beauty and body products mainly for people of color and a lot of those products are used in salons all over the country salons that are now closed anyway in 2018. Tristan's company was acquired by Procter & Gamble and today he's still the CEO of Walker & Company.

2 (4m 59s):
I spoke with Tristan. From his home in Atlanta, Georgia where he's been leading his employees through this unexpected new reality.

1 (5m 6s):
So first and foremost when this started happening with and make sure that our people are taken care of right? So, you know, we started work from home about for close to five weeks ago. Can we saw this coming and wanted to jump ahead of it, but I had the very quickly realized that we all had very different situations. Right much like me had two kids at home. I had kind of moonlight quote-unquote has a Pre-K teacher ER now, right. So one of the first things that I encourage everybody to do and this is kind of about modeling the way, you know, I had to block out this sections in my calendar where I just could not participate in work, right my kids needed to complete their school work and I needed to afford them the time to do that and I encourage all of my teammates do the same and frankly as a result of it and the business has been doing just fine.

1 (5m 53s):
In fact, when we think about, you know online orders folks are still buying from us. In fact, we're probably three four. Our daily sales online up since the start of this right but the thing that's most important regardless of any of that stuff. Is that our people are safe and

2 (6m 9s):
well, yeah for sure Tristan for a lot of people watching, you know, they're running businesses small businesses and you know what it was like to have a small business because you started your business.

1 (6m 21s):
Yeah, right.

2 (6m 22s):
What are ways that you can think of to kind of keep the morale going like with with your team? For

1 (6m 27s):
example? Yeah. I mean, it's hard to doable right folks. Have their own unique schedules thank goodness for things like you no slack in text message among other things, right? You know, we have folks sharing kind of what they're watching during the quarantine what hobby is they're learning what drink recipes they're learning right? And you know, we also have other channels of Engagement. We see what folks are doing with their children on Instagram, right and we can engage with them there. It's so for us it hasn't really required a daily fixed time of engagement, right because we're still working throughout the day and speaking with each other. But I think again our respect for each other's schedules are respect and transparency for what's going on.

1 (7m 7s):
But also sharing some of the things that they're learning and good moments. I think is

2 (7m 11s):
refreshing. How are you able to reassure people who are nervous about I don't know their job prospects or their economic situation. Like are you guys able to retain everybody and avoid layoffs for now? Yeah. Oh,

1 (7m 22s):
yeah. Oh, yeah, you know, we're fortunate in a partnership with Proctor and Gamble. You're very very fortunate, but also recognize that not One has that luxury even though it feels in precedented. It's not unprecedented. We've been through all types of recessions, you know, it's a lesson for all of us to learn how we can prepare for each situations like this, whether it be kind of cash preservation, you know ensuring that you have kind of tight loyal excited hopeful Mission oriented team and the rest is, you know, you just got to do the work right and follow a strategy that matters, but you know, the thing that I Can say at least be hopeful and know that you know, this is temporary.

1 (8m 5s):
It might last a little bit longer than expected but it is temporary and there is light at the end. I

2 (8m 10s):
believe here's a question from Michael Peterson. What advice would you give to somebody starting out in this current

1 (8m 16s):
climate? Yeah, you know, I think we talked a little bit about this during the how I built this episode live. It's know your why right? This is really an important time to not start a business. Just to start a business and you know one theme during our conversation guy was really feeling like you're uniquely position and do the thing that you're doing and you know, it's not necessarily the financial potential benefit of doing that. It's the the happiness and the joy that you find in times of great success and potential failure right you persist and it's really critical that you actually know your why is why you're doing it right and it sounds so simple.

1 (8m 59s):
It sounds almost. Aloof, but I can't tell you how many times folks don't really understand the answer to that question. And when you kind of answer it for yourself ask yourself it again answer it again and ask it again, right and you everything will fall into place. If you feel that you are uniquely positioned to do the thing that you're doing, right this stuff will pass and you will have acquired a bunch of learnings to be more successful on the other

2 (9m 23s):
side Trish in this is a question from Chris peers. How do you think this pandemic is going to change your business?

1 (9m 30s):
Yeah, I think it's I try and take kind of more Global world view right? I'm a part of Procter & Gamble, right and 70 80 billion dollar Revenue company that serves five billion people around the planet right now, but let me go back to you know, this idea of humanist the way we interact with each other right after this are we going to keep shaking each other's hands you think about the comfort of working from home, you know this idea of four-day Work Week five-day workweek. Now, you can't work from home. You can't be more productive. Active some people actually might like it, you know, you know, what does this mean for you know our appreciation of each other, right? I am craving for human interaction right now.

1 (10m 12s):
I really really am right but it makes you realize that things you took for granted before and we're all going to have to actually expect everything to

2 (10m 22s):
change. No, I know it's crazy to imagine how we are going to interact and formal and informal settings. This is a question from Andres. He's 12. He's from Malta is watching in multiple. Cool. He's like, how are you continuing with production and deliveries Procter & Gamble is the mother ship now, which in a lot of ways has built resiliency, right? If you were a start-up on your own you might be in big trouble right now having Procter & Gamble be behind you actually gives you some stability and security. So, how are you dealing with producing the product and getting it out to customers?

1 (10m 54s):
Yeah. So I mean this idea of stability security Procter & Gamble's 480 years they've seen this sort of thing, right they started as a smaller company and became something that was not small. So the ability to learn around what resilience really means for a company that's been around for so long as an inspiring one to me. So I wanted to kind of make that make that clear as far as production. We are subject to the same issues that most others are you know, we have one product right now that's on delay until June is one of our kind of top products, right? It's actually RT blade that connects with our trimmer and we're finding ways to kind of get it to our consumers more quickly.

1 (11m 37s):
But again, this goes back to being transparent with your consumers about what's going on and fortunately, we're in a position where everybody can understand. Yeah, but there are lessons to be learned of this right. You got to manage your demand better. You got to diversify your production, right? You gotta, you know horde more cash in the future. So, you know, I think of everything as an opportunity for learning as Opposed to the potential issues that you're dealing with in the

2 (12m 3s):
present, you know, I was talking to Jenny Burton Bauer of Jeni's Splendid ice cream a couple weeks ago on the show and and she said we're so busy. We're always like rushing around, you know this better than anyone running a company that there's very rarely time to just stop and innovate and to just think deeply because to come up with new ideas and new products just requires time and like head space. Right? Like are you finding that you actually have some space right now to do some of that thing?

1 (12m 30s):
Being we have no choice right Innovation Doesn't Really Happen sitting in a kitchen and hoping for the best the way I think about it. It requires some physical activity, right? I walk around kind of the block around my house and multiple times without any phones without any music and things may or may not pop up, right? You know, it took Walker & Company 30 years to get the idea to do

2 (12m 55s):
from the time you were from the time you were a kid from

1 (12m 57s):
the time that I was born until it happened, right but That was a result of kind of living life and having things kind of fall into my lap and understanding if there was an opportunity. It's no different today. You have to just afford yourself time to be able to look outward.

2 (13m 13s):
Yeah so much of what you're like brand is about is cumin connection, like people touching their faces and people kind of showing people how to use your products and I mean to some of that change does does that human touch and human connection

1 (13m 29s):
change? I hope not. I'm still going to be going my barber right getting my hair cut because I sure as hell need it. But you know, I think those Norms of thought of on both sides, right, you know, there's a principle and client relationship right that my barber has with me as I have a principle incline relationship with our consumers. We need to be thoughtful about how we package things, right? You know, she might need need my barber my need to be thoughtful about the sanitizing stuff right all that jazz. But we just need to think about the secondary tertiary impacts of how we interact with our clients, which is good for everybody.

1 (14m 10s):
Anyway, so yeah, I'm hopeful that it does change for the better but it sure as hell will

2 (14m 14s):
change. This is a question from Vincent brathwaite out of all the books that you've read one which one influence the way you do business and which one influenced your personal

1 (14m 24s):
life interesting. It's probably only one Business book that really helped me think about How to be a better just CEO today and its high output management my Andy Grove he's very good at distilling why you need quantitative and qualitative metrics in the assessment of your people or output etcetera. I think personally, you know, one of the the best books that I read was Race Against the Machine you have this one percent 99% issue going on and the idea is that folks Top are leveraging technology and ways to make them a hell of a lot more productive. Right? Well folks in the 99% are not so how can I actually help to close that Gap to ensure that we're all participating in this this new innovation economy.

1 (15m 14s):
And the reason you know one would think that that's like impactful as a business leader, but it really does change the way I think about everything right but the types of businesses I want to create and to whom the respect of diversity around The world right and its impact on consumerism among other things. It has fundamentally changed the way my kind of worldview is now it's it has impacted other things that I read write and I'm more Choice full and purposeful in the things that I do recognizing this very important issue, which I think is one of the most important in the world right now.

2 (15m 53s):
Yeah, for sure. This is a question from Terra Giacomo Z. What about productivity tips? I mean, obviously we're all balancing different, you know, different situations you've got kids at home and you've got to look after them and run a business and stay productive. I have to say that I have been a lot more productive lately every moment of the day is work and being with my family its kind of intertwined but like for you, how are you able to kind of stay

1 (16m 19s):
productive every when I was in high school, there's this exercise that was given to us and you know, the exercise was very simple. It had a sheet it had every hour of the day from From Midnight to midnight and then you just block out what you're doing during those times. Right? So 8 hours of that time is sleep. Let's say four hours five hours of that time was class then another let's say three hours of that time was studying right there still left over something like six seven hours of the day that can actually be used productively and you realize how much time is wasted doing things that you don't necessarily need to do, you know throughout this time, you know, I have my son's at home. I have to you know, do their continuous learning that sort of But also had to realize for myself I am not a trained Pre-K teacher.

1 (17m 4s):
I do what I can and we make best efforts my wife and I to do as well as we can but during the times those six seven hours of free time that you don't really recognize, you know, it's taking care of yourself right forget about productivity and work because that's already accounted for in those hours. We hadn't talked about take time for yourself. What is the hobby? I read a lot and I make time for myself, right? You know when I mentioned a little earlier Sure, how we you know, you have to model the way and block out time. So the other team members can actually see that you know, I think that applies across the board whether that be at work family friends Etc. But if you just do that, very simple exercise, you'll be surprised by how much time you have to do the things that you didn't think that you had the time

2 (17m 47s):
to really really quickly before we wrap up Tristan in five years from now when you look back on this time, what is the thing that you that you do today the change you make that makes your business? This more resilient in five years from now.

1 (18m 3s):
I don't think that there is a change in so much as my reflecting back on the fact that I was consistent. And you know, I talk a lot about values as you know, and we've been through a lot, you know layoffs in the past right down rounds up Browns all that stuff. Now we're going through this kind of covid-19 Crisis and it's important that our people know that I am consistent in my judgment right consistent in my courage consistent in my loyalty to our people and we're doing things that make everybody else realize that that consistency is there because they'll be another one of these in the future whether it's covid-19. something else right and you've got to really make decisions clearly and I'm most proud when I recognize that I did things that are in line with my values and I was consistent throughout and that's really the most important message that I would give to anybody but I would be most proud in five years if I reflect back on it and not only I felt that I was consistent, but the people who supported me through this know that I was being so in so much as their willingness to continue to be led into the

2 (19m 11s):
Future. I Love It Tristan so great to see you. Thank you so much for doing this Tristan Walker. Thank you. Thank you. That's an excerpt from my conversation with Tristan Walker founder of Walker & Company to see the full conversation. Just go to facebook-dot-com how I built this and we're going to be putting these online conversations in your feed every Thursday and hosting the actual conversations every week on Facebook live next week. We're going to be having live conversations every single day with chefs and Honours, you can talk about how the food industry is handling this crisis. We're going to be talking to a claimed Chef Daniel whom of Eleven Madison Park Christina, Tosi of Milk Bar sameen Nusrat author of Salt Fat acid heat Alice Waters, Jose Andres and Kyle connaughton of single thread.

2 (19m 59s):
So join us live every single day next week at 12 noon Eastern at facebook.com how I built this we'll have a different conversation every single day. So bring your questions and you don't need a Facebook. Account to watch if you want to find out more about our live conversations or other virtual and PR events go to NPR presents dot-org. Thank you for listening stay safe, and we'll see you next week. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.