0 (0s):
Hey everyone. And welcome to how I built this Resilience addition from NPR I'm guy Ross, and on these episodes where hearing from entrepreneurs and other interesting people about how they've been building resilience into their businesses during this very challenging time. And today my conversation with a filmmaker M Night Shyamalan I spoke with M Night as part of NPR Storytelling Lounge at this year Sundance Film Festival Night is an acclaimed filmmaker whose work includes the Sixth Sense Unbreakable and Split. And more recently he's entered the world of television with his Apple TV Plus series. Servant now in its second season, before he became a blockbuster, a film director, a producer and writer Night grew up outside Philadelphia were S his fans know many of his stories take place.

0 (47s):
And as a kid, he loved recreating and filming his favorite movies in his spare time. I want to just start briefly with a little bit about your, your story, because you really developed a passion for filmmaking as a kid, right? You had like a super eight camera at home. I had one when I was a little kid, I used to play around with it, unlike you, I didn't make 45 movies on it by age of 17. How did you just fall in love with that camera and making movies as a kid? How did that happen?

1 (1m 16s):
I think it was a confluence of when I was born and the natural feeling towards Storytelling that I didn't realize that I had, but being born in that 1970. And then, you know, you have ITI when I'm a 11, you have read is a lot of stark when I'm 12 and to star Wars when I'm 70 and a half, and just right between the eyes, you know, masterpieces meant right. For me. And that became my religion and this feeling. I wanted to recreate that feeling I wanted to, you know, so you'd be at home. And what you would normally do as a child is, you know, you pretend that you're in the X one fighter and you're, you know, you're doing all of the, the play imaginary play, but you keep taking that further and further.

1 (1m 60s):
And, Oh, well, you know, maybe I could record this and, and, and maybe it could look like that. And so I was a very organic, just following a love. And the love was really just a hobby. Cause I thought there was no precedent for becoming a filmmaker, certainly in the Indian community are the Asian community. And so this was just for me for fun, something that I did and I was going to be a doctor. That's what my parents are. And every one of my family is. So I think, you know, from like 10 to like 15, that was, it was just a, this is the thing that I love to do on the road to med school.

0 (2m 36s):
I mean, I, I remember this camera's cause they were expensive, right? The cartridges were expensive, it was expensive to get them developed. You only had a few minutes on that super eight. What, what kinds of minutes? Yeah. For some of your super fans know that you do show little clips of them are some of your DVDs you were released. What kind of stories are you telling?

1 (2m 53s):
I need to convey the level of lack of talent that was shown in pieces staggering like that. If you're looking for like a morsel of creative instinct or originality, it's a void of all of those things. It's just, just absolutely me copying, copying anything that I've seen in the worst possible way, you know, in an ineffectual Wei and finding that ineffective in finding that, not satisfying, kind of pretending I'm making a horror movie, pretending I'm making Raiders a lost art pretending I'm making a James Bond movie it's farcical when you see them. But it was funny. I skipped the wonderful part of it, which is the creating I was mimicking rather than creating.

1 (3m 39s):
And so it had none of the joy. And I think once I started to make up things that were original, it felt so different than that.

0 (3m 47s):
It's such an important point because whenever we find people who've mastered what they do, you know, people who've been on the show, what you do as a filmmaker, you know, people ask me how often asked me, how do you interview people so well, and, and, and the answer is I did it really badly for five to six years, over a 25 year period. When I started, I was a really bad at it. And it's really important, I think to underscore this idea that when you start something, you're going to be bad at it until you start to figure out how to get good at it.

1 (4m 17s):
Mm I. You're touching on one of my rules of life, which is iterate as much as you can create environments where you can safely iterate. Some people call it failure. I don't, you know, it's so stigmatized that word, that just call it iterating. Where can you iterate safely? So, as we were just talking, he was just occurred to me by me, couching, filmmaking, as a hobby, as fun. It was safe to fail because it has no merit in like, whether I was going to be going to become a doctor, you know, anything, you know, that, that my, my Indian parents valued. It was like, Oh, it has no bearing on that. So I could, wow, that was terrible. Let me do another one of those.

1 (4m 57s):
Wow. That was a little less terrible. And you could just go and he never said anything about me. And so it, as opposed to, Hey, I'm going to be a filmmaker while I'm terrible at it. I'm not going to do this anymore. Cause they don't like this feeling,

0 (5m 8s):
You know, and how they built this. We've had so many stories of people who either are first generation Americans are born abroad and grew up here and you hear the same stories, which is my parents wanted me to be a doctor or an engineer because that was a safe path to, to a secure and stable life. And your parents, as you mentioned, were doctors, they immigrated with you from India. When you were a kid, what did they, what did they make of your filmmaking obsession? I mean, I mean, obviously they eventually supported because he went to Film school, but, but he did, they try to kind of discourage you from it at the beginning.

1 (5m 44s):
First of all, it should be known that at that time. And maybe it's similar now I'd have to talk to a 20 year old Indian child who wants to go in the arts. But at that time, me saying, I want to go to film school was exactly the same. If I had said I'm going to a goth rock and roll star and I'm going to begin today. If I just said that as a mom, I'm going to wear makeup and with a spike, my hair, I'm going to where it, the colors. And I'm going to scream into the microphone. It may have been met with the same kind of a, okay, well that's insane. A and my dad reacted with classic Asian Daphnis, which was, he just became silent and didn't, you know, just disappointed beyond belief and just ignored This.

1 (6m 25s):
And then my mom, who I think fancied herself, an artist when she was younger, obviously never had the opportunity to follow any of this was encouraging in a kind of follow you thing, you know, but really I think there was what's going to happen. And with regards to the college thing that I really only applied to NYU Tisch school early. And at that time, that was unusual. I was the only kid who went and got in early and said, I'm applying to one school. This is it. I'm just going to make films. Wow.

0 (6m 52s):
One of the earliest films, actually, I think it was really the earliest film, a praying with anger. You didn't just direct it and write it and produce it. He started in it, but you had to raise all the money to fund their production, which we still do. But back then, when you were totally unproven and untested, I mean, it must have been terrifying. I mean that, and that's the same story with an entrepreneur. We've done Airbnb and Instagram and Slack and all the stories. And it's the same story. And there's a point where you are unknown Howard Schultz, unknown. Nobody would take his call. Right? Cause he was going to say, Oh, you're a Howard Schultz, a Starbucks. He was Howard Schultz who at one store called the Starbucks. How did you convince people to help you out?

1 (7m 30s):
Well, that first one was friends and bartering and can we borrow this equipment? And, and my uncle giving 5,000 and a and giving 2000 and it was like, you know, putting it together when it was all of a sudden we sell it to cable and HBL and things, just the same amount of money that we spent on it. And we give it back and it was like, you know, basically a wash alone over those years, but it was terrifying, right? And you're not making any money. And it gave me a chance to go to film festivals. I mean, that story that you're asking me about the first film keeps on happening over and over and over in your career at at least for me, because I try to do original films. And so there's this pull to go into the system.

1 (8m 13s):
But for whatever reason, I feel like every time I want to stay outside the system a bit and try something a little bit different. And it's almost every single time it's feels like that. I mean, when I did the visit, which was many, many, many years later, I put a mortgage on the house and did the whole thing all over again.

0 (8m 30s):
How did you, and this may still be something that you face and we'll talk about this a bit is certainly something I face. But certainly in the early days, when you still, you know, you hadn't proven what you are capable of to anybody, including to yourself. Yeah. How, how did you overcome self doubt?

1 (8m 49s):
You, you, you don't that you don't, I have it right now in front of you. I mean, I, I just from editing room and I have all these issues with this reel and I'm trying to figure it out and that voice inside you says, you're not, you're not going to figure it out. It's not, you're not gonna hear that when I'm done with you, I'm going to write my next movie. I'm supposed to spend a few hours a day writing the next movie. I'm going to shoot you. I'm trying to balance everything and I'm scared to ride it because I'm might be today. I won't be able to think of that thing. And then he just, my, both my older daughters artists' and M said that is your plight. You were going to wrestle with your demons every single day of your life.

0 (9m 26s):
It sounds to me like you sort of absorb a tremendous amount of pressure, right? Before everything you put out is that because you have had so much success and the expectations are so high and you want to meet those expectations. Where's this come from?

1 (9m 43s):
Gosh, I definitely have a healthy, a healthy, I mean, unhealthy anxiety about what could go wrong and what's going to happen. And that's the opposite of where you need to be emotionally when you create. So the only relief I've ever had in my life, this is what I was telling too. My head of my company yesterday and said, you know, I've been anxious a lot. And I said, you know what? The amazing thing is the only thing that makes me not anxious is creating. Hm. Is it turns out the thing that I do to ground and be centered is my job. So it's like the beautiful thing that you do, the thing that you love to do is your job.

1 (10m 22s):
So all this other stuff, to be honest, I've learned is irrelevant. How many people did come on the weekend and what did the New York times think? And what did that fan think? And Oh, that other guy made that much or did that, or, Oh, the cover they offered you to cover this or that. None of that matters. I honestly, to me inside, it's, after we're done the interview and I sit down and I can figure out what happens after he falls down. And I'm talking about a character in this new movie, on the hits the ground and hits his head and what they all are about to do. If I can figure that out today, I'll be so happy. So, so happy.

0 (10m 59s):
I love that answer. And I'm often I'm often asked what makes a good leader. And I one of the first things I say is self doubt. And the ability to interrogate yourself and your own wisdom, right? Because your films have grossed $3 billion. So people watching this, I hope that people are watching us are looking at you and saying, thank you for saying, it's amazing to hear somebody whose films a gross $3 billion. Who's still constantly, he has anxiety about, you know, about whether he is good at what he does

1 (11m 25s):
As I get it. A lot of this is healthy or not, but every single time I go, this is the last movie that they'll ever let me make. This is, this is the one. And is that okay? So make it so that it's okay. If this was the last one, you put it, all of that. Wow. I'm ready to burn the house down for this value system that I showed artistically in this movie. And if that means that's the end, then no problem. And so each movie is like that anxiety. Like I remember when I was a kid writing Unbreakable while I was editing sucks. Sense cause I'm like, they're never going to let me direct after this movie comes out. So let me try to go as fast as I can make this movie about comic books, which no one wants to see a movie about comic books.

1 (12m 8s):
So I was like, I'm the only person that would ever want to see a movie about comic books. So I was like writing that as fast as I could, like on the train rides and all the mentality was, you know, you're an Indian kid from Philly. This is not, you are already lucky to have been directed a movie. This is maybe an immigrant mentality too. Cause my parents are never stopped thinking like this. I mean, they have it in their house, literally pictures of me and Boston covers of like magazines everywhere. And I'm like, mom, you can't just have this stuff up on the world that, you know, like they still are waiting for me to have my big break. That's like, that's an immigrant mentality. My, the first time I still told her that I was like, Hey, you know this amazing thing, you know, bill Clinton asked for me to come to the, the white house to have a dinner.

1 (12m 53s):
This is amazing. And mom, I was like, Oh my God, this is amazing. Maybe something good will come of this. And I'm like, mom, dad, that's the thing. That was the good thing. He is not going to give me part of the country or an Island. That's not, that's not a immigrant end here. This is it. And it was like, they never get out of that thing every day. When I come over and see them every day, now they are they're at 80 now. And they are just still waiting to hear, you know, the good news of we made it. We're gonna make it. And I'm like, I keep telling them we made it. It's it's all good. It's all some of what happened, anything good happened today?

0 (13m 29s):
I'm, I'm laughing and shaking my head because I'm also the child of immigrants. And I, I know that story so well, it's so true. Night your, your work typically explores pretty dark themes, right? Like death and grief and physical isolation and paranormal activity. And you are, I've read so much about your such a joyful person. You have a wonderful family and tell me how those themes came to be, what you became known for.

1 (13m 58s):
We hung out, we were having beers or whatever. I'm a little bit mischievous. So that, that mischievous side of like making you laugh and, you know, playing tricks on you, that would be how our relationship would be. And that just kind of transfers into playing with the audience and making them laugh or playing tricks on them. Or, Ooh, I love when they uhhh and are when they, they can't believe what they just saw. Our, that was unexpected. It makes me happy. And so it's a playfulness about it. I think the spirituality is me. A part of me. That's always, I'm constantly reading books and trying to understand things. And, but I do think the inherent spirituality of the Indian culture kind of morphed from my grandma saying, you know, this house is haunted or she puts like a nails, a chicken head outside the house because of some bad thing that was, she thinks the curse has put on her house.

1 (14m 52s):
This kind of, it's just normal in the culture to believe in those things that kind of moved over and became aliens and comic books and comic book characters and stuff.

0 (15m 2s):
So walk me through your creative process a little bit. I mean, what you just said gives me a bit of a window into where your ideas come from, but I mean, you've got infinite ideas. You just mentioned that you're working on, on trying to figure out what happens after he hits his head on the ground. Right? So how do you find them and how do you give yourself the space to come up with ideas and to come up with a whole story a whole world?

1 (15m 31s):
You know, what is it? The space is such a great thing that you said. I wonder if, when you see this sinus curve of success, failure, success, failure. And a lot of people go success failure and never return, right? There's inherent pools that happen because when you have nothing you become really clear about what's important and what are your values? You're very clear about them. And then you get up and you start to have success. And there's this accretion of good decision-making that gets you here. And then you have all this distractions that are starting to bend you and distract you from what you knew before. And it starts to make bad decisions and you start to, to come like that.

1 (16m 11s):
And this space that anonymity gave you, gives you at the beginning, the space that I then again saw during the pandemic where I was just had to stay at home and just sit there. There was no there's no press tours. I'm not going on the tonight show. I'm not going to Europe to open up the Film there. I'm not, you know, I'm not doing this screening and that screening, Hey, what interests you? What's your writing? All of these ideas started coming in and reminded me of an earlier time. I do feel space is such a critical thing. I was, and I saw the documentary on bill Gates and he takes that week every year, the think week to just think we don't give ourselves enough of that to let, let us connect to the universe.

1 (16m 59s):
However you want to say this thing of coming up with new ideas. So that part for me is critical that you take the space. And even if it's in the morning, like right now, I'm supposed to take two hours. You can blow the two hours that that's fine. Blow it, sit there and stare at the wall. But that's your two hours to write. Okay. So you're and you'll feel great shame or I do right? You go and you burnt those two hours staring at 12, but you cannot be productive in other ways. So that's the thing for me, because there's so many other ways I can fill it right now. Oh, I need to look at that. Edit. I don't know that all of these things, no, don't don't kid yourself spend the two hours.

1 (17m 39s):
And even if I sat there for two hours wondering what happens to him after he hits his head, five different iterations of things came and went that were incorrect. Right. It feels like I didn't do anything, but I did. And then the next day build and build them.

0 (17m 52s):
Wow. So you do that every day. You give yourself two hours and if you're just staring at the wall, that's those two hours

1 (17m 58s):
That that's the, yes. You try not to stare at the wall, but that I'm allowed to. Yeah. That would be a version of safely failing. Yeah. Right. You creating a space to safely fail every day, but it won't because you're inspired. You're going, Oh yeah. Just write it down. And suddenly you become unlock. Yeah. She, I hate when she says this and then you go, Oh yeah, that's right. I hate that. Because of that. Sometimes I'll read when I'm writing that were just talking about writing for a second. Yeah. I read constantly. So I'll read something. Not necessarily nonfiction, like these books that are in front of me, but something fiction like a, a classic that gives me rhythm. Like things you couldn't possibly connect.

1 (18m 39s):
Why, why they make any sense? Like reading M slaughterhouse five helped me, right. The visit. I don't know why, you know, it just, it just, it, it evokes something in me.

0 (18m 50s):
I wonder how you balance. I mean, you run a production company, you are a manager, you have people who work for you. There's payroll there's. I mean, of course are people who probably do those different things and operational things. But at normal times you must be pulled and tugged in different directions from the business people outside of the company and the Hollywood studios. And, but you're also the creative, you're the person. You're the reason why people want to distribute your films to work with you. Or so how do you balance the creative side of, of what you do in the, the business side of what you have to do that

1 (19m 22s):
This trial and error, where we've gotten to, what I'm about to say is that there's certain principles that now are absolutely essential. Like no dysfunctional geniuses. So your dysfunctional genius. Thanks. I'm going to go to somebody else to help me do the composition or do this or that, or editing or put the, the, the, the, the production design together, whatever it is, protecting your process. The single greatest thing that we have come to understand, and this, so you never say yes to anything that would compromise the process. So if they said, Hey, do you want to do this incredible XYZ project with this superstar who has develop this screenplay right.

1 (20m 5s):
And is going to shoot in this place, you know, and you're going well, I don't have the ability to, to iterate in the way that that is safe for me. That that would be a, an, almost a guaranteed, no, because I can't guarantee that I can make a zillion mistakes and figure it out and I'm on my own. And so we were heavily protecting the process. And so if you look at the things that I'm making and the partners that I'm making it with, their super healthy, they allow me to have this process. And what is the goal? The goal, like what is success? Right? So it's not a monetary thing. I believe that that monetary will come if you do this other thing. And if it doesn't, it's still fine, but the monetary will come if build a strongest connection with the audience as possible, they know that they are coming to someone who isn't pandering or going to do something that I know you want to see.

1 (20m 59s):
It's going to be very specific. I, you know, all of the filmmakers that we work with and the TV shows and things, I'm always like the stronger your voice is, the more specific it is. Don't copy me or anybody else, or even try to round off the things that are not great about you. Your blind spots are your strengths. That is why you're not doing this. And you're looking at that. That's part of what makes you so beautiful to consequently that then your voice shoots, it pops in the marketplace and they hear you. And they remember you. We know This, all of us know this. When were hanging out with someone and someone says something that's kind of rote, or they betrayed themselves. They don't know themselves.

1 (21m 39s):
They don't think in that moment. That's what they did. We just, this feeling like, wow, I don't really know them. Well, that was a little artificial comes out. That's so true in art as well.

0 (21m 48s):
Yeah. I mean, you know, this, and, and our listeners know this so much of putting that idea out into the world is hard and making it succeed is even harder. And then maintaining that success is even harder than that. And I wrote a speech that you gave at Drexel university in Philly, in, in 2013, where you talked about a series of setbacks you had in 2013, and you said, I found myself questioning myself. And every thought that came out of my head and, and you know, maybe I'm a sham. You were talking about how you went through a period where he really did not believe in yourself

1 (22m 24s):
Now that I'm safely away from that moment a little bit. I can talk about it in the terms that it should be talked about. It's like a great teacher teaching you. What's important in that Drexel, the commencement speech that I gave, I was talking about two columns of everything in your life and the one column, or is the things that you have control over. And the other column has the things you don't have control over. And a lot of times in life, you think you have control over this other column, right? And you shouldn't put any energy into that column at all. So what ended up happening is I was in many ways, if I'm being honest with myself, I was confused about this. Where is my power? And do I have to have any power at all?

1 (23m 4s):
Or is it all a femoral that I make it all up? I'm sensing the, the lie in that, that I have control over this column. And I'm blurring it now and saying, I don't, I don't think I have control in either column. Hmm. And so I was getting really scared. This is existentially what's happening. So I keep trying to control the outcome. So I'm like, if I work with this person, if I do this kind of movie, if I do this, rather than I wonder what happens to the guy when he hits his head, right, that's all I should be worried about nothing else. And so the world, as I kept putting more and more into the wrong column, nothing was working out in a way and I wasn't happy. So then everything went away and then I went, I just suddenly felt clear.

1 (23m 45s):
And it was one of those things that was that I was having, doing a puzzle with my little one. And I just came back from showing the movie that I mortgaged my house for. Right. And I showed an early, early cut, like for three weeks, four weeks out of shooting, which is, you should never do this to all the buyers, because I was so scared that I was gonna, you know, go bankrupt or whatever. Right. And nobody wanted to buy it and sat down. And I was doing the puzzle, we started this thousand piece puzzle. And I was like, this is impossible. Right. Looking at this puzzle of me and her were like, we both looked at each other and I'm like, this is impossible. Yeah. And we just did one piece and we did, and we took searched through the thousands of pieces and found like eight pieces and then 10 pieces and 12 pieces.

1 (24m 28s):
And we finished a day like with 12 pieces or something. And we did it again the next day. And suddenly I went, well, I don't need to know the whole picture. All I need to know is buying the next puzzle piece. That's all you need to concentrate on its a version of staying in this column. Yeah. And so what I did was nobody wants to buy it. I'm just going to go into any room and make it just a little bit better. Yeah. That's all I'm going to do today. So I went and I was like, Oh yeah, I can tighten that. And I could move that. And then I did that again the next day, the next day, the next day. And then I suddenly forgot about the mortgage and I forgot about my career being over. I forgot all about that. And I just was looking forward to finding the next puzzle piece with the movie.

1 (25m 8s):
And I'm like, Ooh, you know, if I did that line, Oh my God, that, that takes so much funny. The one we never put in, we should put that in an a and D and then a cheat. Oh, I have a great idea. Instead of it being six days that there are stories about it is going to be five days. Let's take a fi let's take that third day right out of the movie and slide it together. It will be much more of a movement like a home or over in a boom. And then I was, it was off to the races. And then when we were done that movie, you know, we ended up showing it to one studio and they bought it and it became universal, became one of the biggest movies of the year and blah, blah, blah, blah.

0 (25m 40s):
When we come back and just a moment more of my conversation with a filmmaker and Night Shyamalan and how he's had to adapt his creative process to write, produce and direct multiple projects safely over the past year, stay with us. I'm Guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this Resilience addition from NPR. And one more thing. The New York times bestselling book, how I built this is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas, inspiration, wisdom, and encouragement, to have the courage, to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with tons of stories.

0 (26m 21s):
You haven't heard about how some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know, and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this, the book available, wherever you buy your books. Hey, welcome back to how I built this Resilience edition. And I'm talking with a filmmaker and Night Shyamalan the pandemic has completely upended Hollywood over the past year, but Despite all the uncertainty Night PIs taken this year and stride working on a new film called Old and the new season of his Apple Plus TV show. Servant both Film during 2020 Night.

0 (27m 2s):
I want to talk to you about this past year asking about this past year, because it's obviously been extremely challenging for the, for the movie industry. I mean, how have you been able to, to shoot edit directed me? How have you been able to do any of the things that you normally do?

1 (27m 19s):
No. The answer is a surprising one and the answer is that it was my busiest year. Wow. Why it was, is I'm a writer and I was able to write, I was able to work with writers on zoom for the TV show, and we ended up riding all the episodes for the next season and outlining the final season of the show while we are independent. So we got way ahead, way ahead. And that's an amazing thing. And I did, I was went ahead in my head and I said, you know, like, I'm going to go shoot this new movie. So let's start casting. So I was the first, basically the first movie in the world that started casting during the pandemic. So every one in the world was auditioning for me by zoom.

1 (28m 2s):
And at that moment, it was still very odd that you would be in your bedroom or your living room. It was super odd, right? Everybody was like, Hey, I've never done this before. And actors from all over the world, thousands and thousands and thousands of auditions. So I had wow, all this time to audition and prep and write and storyboard. I storyboard out everything. I draw every single shot of the movie. So I took the time to do all of that. So there was a lot of work that could be done here and virtually to set us up. And then we had to figure out how to do it together in a safe way. And there was no guidelines, right? This was so I just took the information, talk to as many doctors and, and did it by my understanding of human nature, which is this.

1 (28m 44s):
If I do it in the tightest smallest group of people and I buy out everything, I buy out the hotel, I buy out everyone. That's giving us food. We don't leave the hotel. The people that are cleaning the hotel rooms, every single human being for a very short amount of time. And everybody commits as much as possible to make a true, true bubble here. I am not going to be able to stop the costumer from talking to the construction worker and them after I'm not going to be able to stop that that's going to happen. So, but they're going to be within the bubble and give them a really clean parameters. It's eight weeks. I'm asking you for eight weeks and this is why we are doing it.

1 (29m 24s):
You don't go to your daughter's birthday. You don't see your sister. None of that happens if you can't. I totally understand it, but what good on the next movie? No problem. No problem whatsoever. No pejorative, nothing. But if you could do this for eight weeks, I'm going to pay you and we're going to go make this movie. But that is the only way I will do these projects is if every single person that we come in contact with is within our bubble. And we did it and it worked really well for me because my movie takes place only in two locations. So we were able to buy out that whole location. And so we literally Guy for, I would say for two and a half months, I didn't meet a human being that wasn't wow.

1 (30m 4s):
And test it in a negative. And in our bubble, like I didn't even meet him. I remember when I first came back when to go to like, you know, pick up something. I'm like, Oh my God, this is the first human beings that I didn't personally test and having our bubble How for three months. So it was like that. And we were a very lucky cause everybody did abide by this. We tested three times a week, every single human being thousands and thousands of tests and not a single positive. And everybody went home, we made this movie and we made the TV show under those parameters. And it was tough. Some people were scared to leave their families for that long, but he understood the why I was saying, you just, you can't, you have, and if you can do four weeks and then leave us, then I'll get another person to come do four weeks.

1 (30m 48s):
Like, I was very clean about what we were doing. You just can't come back and forth kind of thing. Well, where did you do this? While the movie was done in the Dominican Republic. So that was a great thing. The government helped us a lot and helped us for them. They were, they didn't quite have the scale of the pandemic that we had. So their, their anxieties and it is an outdoor, a lot. The movie was outdoors primarily. So this is the Film Old this is Old. And then the other project was Servant for Apple, which is we had to finish shooting the second season, which is out now. And that was in Pennsylvania, that's in pensive. And that one was in Philly and they were very different in tenor. A, because of the two countries relationship to the pandemic at the time.

0 (31m 31s):
Wow. That's just incredible. M yeah, the film was supposed to be released in February, but it's coming out in July, which doesn't seem like that much of a delay.

1 (31m 40s):
No, no. Where are we picked? And again, where the movie industry in general as is a circus, right? It's a traveling circus. So you're, I'm anticipating from the time I get the idea at the time you see it in the movie, theaters is two years, you know, I'm already thinking, what will it be like, what will life be like, even who will be president? These things all have a, a, a ramification on the, the feeling of the audience and all of that stuff. And for us, when we did, we said based on what we knew about the vaccine's and what the, what the protocols were looking like and how it was coming along, I felt that July, July 23rd was a place where the world would be ready to be back to normal. And we could be part of bringing everyone safely back together.

1 (32m 22s):
That was a game of, and if it didn't work out, we would just push it. But it felt like that was the right point.

0 (32m 27s):
Night, we've got tons of questions that have come in and I promised to get to some of them. So let me, let me see if I can get through to a few of them. This is from a pillow or Fitzgerald polar asks. What advice do you have for aspiring writers and directors of color who want to break into the industry, which is largely dominated by white men?

1 (32m 43s):
You know, I've been doing a lot of soul searching myself about this particular subject, because I think many of the things I experienced from 21 years old till today, I just accepted as my particular path that the, the, the headwinds and the resistance and the things of wow, that was, that was really harsh and wow, that, that wasn't very helpful. And wow, huh. Are all of these things that, that feeling is it I'm coming to terms with what, what it meant to me, you know, a and how much, how much it became a part of my identity, the things that this person is asking. Look, I think this is a really the best time it's ever been for that question to be asked, because I believe in everybody's individuality is their power.

1 (33m 29s):
So the fact that I am was born in Pondicherry India and live outside Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and I wear flannel shirts. I love cheeseburgers, but my mom has a Pooja at our house. All of that mixed together is why I think people connect with my voice around the world. We'll call it the immigrant flavor that that's coming from, that that's redefining a American Storytelling is each of our responsibilities to do, you know, to bring that to it. Isn't like, Hey, I'm angry. I don't have a seat at the table. It's not only bring your chair to the table. It's make the table longer. That's your response.

1 (34m 9s):
You'll go add to the table. You know? And, and so I said once to a, a, a Mexican student who was a, I did a speech and he's like, you know, there's not enough Mexican voices and, and all that stuff. And I was saying to him, I need you. Yeah, you're right. I need you. So tell it, start telling a story for me, telling me a story about, but don't round the corners. Is it the more specific it is? The more power it is where I go, I could never do that. Or Quintin Tarantino could never do that. Or Wes Anderson or David Fincher, can't do that. Right. That's what you want, that you want that specificity of that person who asked a question, telling me exactly the things that make them then, and that includes the negative stuff, the anger, the arrogance, all of that stuff needs to be in there in a truthful capacity,

0 (34m 55s):
Essentially use your voice, right? Because they know that your, your sort of advantage, right? Your unfair advantage is that, is that unlike the people you mentioned, the Wes Anderson's and David Fincher is in the quintessence. He knows you have a perspective that they don't have.

1 (35m 10s):
And they, they each do two, I'm not devoting anybody's point of view. It's just that in society, most of the time, it's been a certain point of view has been more people have been more open to, to a certain point of view, right? And just understanding store how, how much Storytelling affects everything we do as a society, what stories we tell ourselves, what are the basic premises that we take for granted? And we all to decide that as Storytelling help at a certain color, too, that too, the thing that we take for granted,

0 (35m 43s):
I'm going to combine two questions, a question from Hannah Young and Jared Jones. M Anna asks as King of plot twists, which one are you most proud of? And Jared asks, does your reputation of being the plot twist Guy get on your nerves?

1 (35m 58s):
Well, I, you know, it's funny, even as you asked it, there is a certain kind of derivative quality to that. That is frustrating. I would guess I would say more and more than anything else, because I would say, you know, in spirituality, the pervasive nature of kind of talking about spiritualities is just as much there. I, I don't look at it as a kind of a fancy dance move or something like that. Like, okay, now I'm going to do the moonwalk, everybody. Here we go. You know, that's not, it it's a points of view and how to talk about points of view in the structure of Storytelling and not understanding why is she asking that way with checking the way, Oh my gosh, he is acting that way because of that, you know, that kind of like, I love characters realizing things.

1 (36m 46s):
And so if I'm doing my job right, is the storyteller you are with that character, as they realize that this thing that happens. I really enjoy that. I mean, look, I'm, I enjoy feeling, feeling emotions and intellectual thoughts that are unexpected, that I didn't expect to feel that way about. And when I'm, whenever I'm reading or learning the painting can do that a book and do that make me feel this kind of

0 (37m 12s):
Epiphany. Yeah. And do you, I, I hesitate to ask, but do you have a favorite or one that you kind of go back to in your mind that you're particularly proud of

1 (37m 21s):
As the mischievous kid? I really enjoy the reactions I was when we were, I have an audio recording of the visit in the movie theater. And there's the thing that happened for those of you that haven't watched visit I'm that could ruin too, but there's a moment where something is revealed and the audience's reaction is so vocal. It's like the I. I thought the theater was going to be a rough. These were just more favorite moments of me being in the movie theaters with them, with, with the audience is when these things happen. And then the first time I screamed Split it was in Austin, Texas at a film festival at fantastic Fest. And when he got to the last scene, there was music that comes in and prior to the last scene, and the music is from a previous movie.

1 (38m 8s):
And as soon as those first notes happen, that there was a guy like I snuck in and hit, and I saw a guy in there and he was sitting back and he's watching. And the music came in and he was like, and he just started sitting up and he started looking at everybody and everybody's still is murmur, went through the whole crowd. And then at the end, when, when the reveal happened and who was sitting there at the counter at the end of the Split, that the, I thought they were going to tear the seats out of the theater went, there were people like putting their hands up in the air, like, like a coaster, like they were going on a roller coaster. Woo. So that was really, it was such a joy. And that, that feeling you can imagine, right. That little kid that loves to, to have that feeling, what that felt like.

0 (38m 46s):
It's amazing to think that you could have that impact on people. I mean, what an an I know that feeling to know that you can move people like that.

1 (38m 56s):
Ah, thanks, man. No, it's, it's a joy. That collective experience is such a wonderful thing. Making movies for me is, and showing them in a movie theater is a little bit of a sacred thing for me, because I think it's when we're at our best, because the teenage girl is affecting the 60 year old guy in the back of the theater. Even if he doesn't know it, she's giggling in a certain place and attuning him in a certain way. And then his kind of taking things in a kind of Ernest or a sincere way, it's affecting her as well. And they were all this quilt as it's putting, coming together. So I mean, it, for me, its a very sacred thing, getting to having the opportunity to tell the stories to, to a group.

0 (39m 34s):
I love this question from Gregory voice. I hope I'm pronouncing that right. Gregory, Gregory asks when things are going wrong. During the script writing process, you know, an edit is not clicking. What are the steps you take to make it better to improve on it? What happens?

1 (39m 48s):
This is when you, when you get stuck, like you're doing, you're essentially you're betraying the story, but you don't know how you're betraying. And so you can feel the damage. You just don't understand it. This isn't working. So any ways that you can say it out loud or put it on a paper, this is not working. This feels so redundant because the way this and this you'll even as you're saying the problem, that was the answer will be kind of in there and embedded in there. You're going with this is redundant, a redundant, Oh wait a minute. What is the, the scene is about why are we doing this whole sequence? I already did it before or this isn't the right time to do that. Or I don't really know her and I keep putting her down and that's why I'm not, I hate writing her because I don't know her.

1 (40m 35s):
It's just a blurry, like empty space that I'm calling her and it's a generic and I don't like that. And so then you so you'll know that and you'll go, well, what was my hope for her? Well, my hope for her would that she would be like my mom and she would have this sense of anger, but she's never been connected to our own anger. Like you'll write something and go, Oh, someone who doesn't realize they're angry. Okay, great. Now I can write that.

0 (40m 59s):
I love that Night this year has been a kind of a horror film on its own. How do you think this past year is going to find expression in, in future films and TV?

1 (41m 10s):
So this w this world of what happened to us is a lot of what I live with. And when I'm thinking about fictional stories, you know, about things that happened to the world and how does it, how do we all feel when we're isolated from each I? And there was so many things that we experienced that I never thought of that occurred to us. I do think that it'll create a paranoia. I think it'll take us a long while to feel safe. Even past the pandemic, we never in a million years thought the whole world would shut down. No, the whole world would shut down. That's it's, it's scary. It's humbling. M and I think it probably a healthy weight for all of us that, you know, is this isn't guaranteed and all, and there'll be that to grapple with.

1 (41m 58s):
That might mean that people just want to escape more and be entertained. Maybe they're not ready for two heaviest stuff. I don't know how that's gonna play out. We have found this movement. This is a whole nother subject. Guy probably another podcast, but this movement of what plays in a movie theater versus at home, and you'll see this movement of drama leaving the movie theater and coming to home like you're okay. Feeling emotional dramatic things in at home, but going to a movie theater with a group of people, you want to be scared and laugh and thrilled. And as a spectacle and all of these things, you want to have a group experience.

1 (42m 40s):
You don't want to have an internal one, like, you know, almost we could call drama and internal thing. So that that's been an interesting bifurcation that's happened, which wasn't there before our streaming and all of these other things. And so I'm studying, you know, what, what, what, how people behave maybe that will change maybe, or maybe that will change.

0 (42m 58s):
Yeah. I, I know that were running at a time that I do did want to ask you about the streaming question. I know that you were very vocal when Warner decided to drop 17 of its major releases. I think on the same day they released them, made them available to stream for a month and you and many other filmmakers were really upset about it. Can you explain why you think that decision by Warner is so detrimental to creators?

1 (43m 21s):
Yeah. It was more of the How that they unilaterally did it without talking to the film makers who had every day, they are just as passionate. I am about this movie going experience. They thought they were making one art form and then they were told, Hey, it's mostly not going to be that way or at all. And that's a very profound thing to change on somebody's that, Hey, we're not even doing the art form that you signed up for to do every decision you were making about how the sound moves through the theater and all, that's not gonna be the case because it's going to be in a home in a home theater, on a TV or on a laptop. It should have been a filmmaker by filmmakers decision of how to handle this year.

1 (44m 1s):
If they wanted to put it out that way. Great. Everybody comes with a decision or if they wanted to wait. And if the studio could handle that financial burden of waiting for a beat, you know, to put it out when it was safer, those conversations just needed to be had. And it felt like they were prioritizing their other business and willing to undermine the movie going experience. That's what it felt like their value system had switched and which is not great for those of us who movie going as is the religion. It sounds like what

0 (44m 32s):
You're saying is that this year, this past year, his kind of supercharged, this trend of dramatic film is being watched at home. And this idea that going to the cinema, which obviously many people haven't is about spectacle. I suspect that's the future, right? Is there a world where going to the movies will be a very special, specific and rare experience in the future? I mean, is that where we're at now?

1 (44m 57s):
I don't believe that at all. I think the second that we can all be back together, again, we're just collective creatures. We want to go experience things together. Let's watch this together. Let's watch the game together. Let's go watch the movie together. And those movies that I promise, this is going to be something you want to share with your friends and others. I believe when you go to the movie theater and you commit to leave your house, park your car, get your babysitter and come and turn off your phone. You cannot multitask. You were making the biggest commitment that you will ever make to an art form for two, two hours. And then we in turn, hold your attention and have to earn that for two hours of that is the greatest commitment.

1 (45m 40s):
And if you put more commitment into anything, you're going to get more back. So the experience, it will be stickier. It will be more powerful and will stay with you longer. So it's just in that way. If you call that the product that is the most powerful product,

0 (45m 52s):
Last question for you. What advice would you give to that kid who made praying with anger? If you, you know, if you now had that opportunity to come back and speak to them and know what you know now, what would you say?

1 (46m 8s):
You know, so much of the worrying about the second column, every single bit of it is a waste of time. I wish I could have figured out that, that idea earlier and told him, I promise you just figure out what happens to the Guy after he hits his head. I promise you, that's all you need to worry about and everything will happen. You know, there are moments to say, Hey, who's going to distribute the movie. And when is the best date and all of that stuff, there are practical things, but that's not where you should put your love and your energy it's over here. Hey, you made this great piece of art and, and you know, he, he was figuring it out. There was no roadmaps of how to do this, but I certainly have spent way too much of my life worrying about things and angsting and being sad over the wrong things.

1 (46m 57s):
Just the, the, the, the wrong things.

0 (46m 60s):
I really love that advice. And Night Shyamalan thank you so much. Thanks for being with

1 (47m 4s):
Us. Thanks. Guy that was really fun talking to you guys.

0 (47m 7s):
That's an excerpt from my live conversation with him. Night Shyamalan for NPR Storytelling Lounge at the Sundance film festival. If you want to see any of our past live interviews, you can find them on the, how I built this Facebook page or at youtube.com/ NPR. And if you wanna join our conversation's live and maybe even asked questions, they happen every Thursday at nine noon Eastern to find out more about the, how I built this Resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents.org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with help from Ferris Safari, JC Howard, Bruce Grant. Elmanian John Keppra, Dona John Isabella, Julia Carney Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers.

0 (47m 51s):
Our intern is Janet <inaudible> Lee. Thanks for listening. Stay safe. And I'll see you back here in a few days. I'm Guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.