4 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience addition. This is where we've been talking with

2 (5s):
entrepreneurs about how to think

4 (7s):
creatively during this moment of economic instability a few days ago. We invited Deval Patrick. The former Governor of Massachusetts to join us governor. Patrick is now an entrepreneur investor and mentor to younger Business Leaders, and he recently wrote a deeply personal article about his own experiences with racism. I'm governor Patrick one of the reasons why we really want to talk to you today. Day, not only because I've interviewed you before and the past and you're just so thoughtful but you also recently wrote an article and you post it on medium. It's called America's Awakening to what it means to be black. I'm going to just want to quote a couple things that you you wrote in that piece. We hear from the famous and the accomplished how their Fame and accomplishment is not immunized them from the presumption of dangerousness by police.

4 (53s):
I gave up going to baseball or football games long ago because I got tired of having to over here drunk and fans at Fenway Park cordial. Stadium shout out epithets at players on the field you write like every other black trial lawyer. I know you were a trial lawyer. I've been mistaken for a defendant awaiting trial and directed elsewhere when I came to sit with other attorneys into the bench the kind of my suit of the quality of my briefcase never mattered. This is what I mean. I read your Memoir. This is one of the most personal things I've ever seen you right tell me about about writing it.

2 (1m 28s):
Well, you know, we've we've all been released so many of my friends have been and I have been

4 (1m 34s):
contacted by our friends white and black and every other kind

2 (1m 38s):
asking how we're doing doing the wake of the of the videotape killing of George Floyd and of the shooting of Ahmad armed robbery and that astonishing Central Park video of Amy Cooper reacting to being told to leash your dog. So my black friends and I We've been exchanging with each other some of the things that we have written and some of the things that we have read that really are a longer form a more complete form of answer to the question. How are you doing? Because it's not simple we're not doing well in a way especially for those who have been as blessed as I and some of my professional friends to have lived very much the American dream.

2 (2m 27s):
We are reminded that that Dream has been elusive for so many other young men and women just as creative just as ambitious because of structural barriers that only a few of us have been able to overcome. We're reminded of what my what my wife calls the indignities du jour, you know, it's the sort of thing we talked about all over the dinner table, but you find in order to function in the larger world. You have to Tamp down and even, you know, try to put out of your mind. I hadn't remembered guy. Until a young then young now less so eight of mine in the campaign and in the in the governor's office reminded me that in the early days of being Governor, maybe in the early months of being Governor.

2 (3m 15s):
I was in the front seat of a black sedan official car in the passenger seat being driven by a black state trooper in plain clothes and we were pulled over by a marked state trooper car, you know, just Why and what was even more ironic is we had lights on our cars well, and when we put them on

4 (3m 38s):
he still wouldn't back off

2 (3m 40s):
and he just I think he was new. He just couldn't process that there was a, you know, a trooper who identified himself as a trooper who was black and plain clothes and a governor who identified himself as a governor in a suit sitting in the front in the front seat. The fact that it happened in some ways as less significant in the point, I'm making than the fact that I had forgotten it because you push this stuff down so you can keep going and do what you you need to do. You know, I

4 (4m 8s):
wonder whether because I think there was a line in that article you wrote about everyone. I know who is African American American America suppresses rage all the time just to function just to get through the day and I imagine that watch These Mass demonstrations and these conversations about racial Injustice and also a racial Reawakening reading that article. It seemed like kind of words and that article just flowed out of you.

2 (4m 37s):
Well, there was more I tried it I cut it down but you know, it's I share the rage. I also I also share the optimism, you know, this this country has been good to me, but I have never I've never forgotten it is not been good to everyone and I think that there been all kinds of situations that I and others are recalling where the and by the way, none of my experience amounts to what happened to George Floyd. I'm not trying to equate them. I'm talking about the through line of devaluing black life Black Talent lack ambition, you know that that is an experience for all of us and that we are so often in interactions with With our white colleagues and friends or with others reluctant to bring up because we don't want to have to number one do the additional work of just making them feel comfortable before.

2 (5m 36s):
Yeah, we bring them up and secondly having to persuade them that it happened. You know, there is a kind of a curse. I just grabbed it to being black which is that you're always asking yourself in this country whether the thing that went sideways in your life was on account of race. It isn't always but sometimes Sometimes it is. Yeah, and the way you know isn't entirely to do with whether it you know is peppered with the Inward and if you look at the you look at the stats you can see is an awful lot of what we've been doing the in this country and and how and whom we've been leaving behind that is as the result of policies or practices that have their roots in racially motivated decisions.

2 (6m 20s):
Yeah, you you

4 (6m 22s):
have worked in major corporate. Coca-Cola Texaco investment firms and now I'm sure you're noticing a lot of big companies Fortune 500 companies are speaking up about their support for racial Justice. What do you make of it? I mean do you think it's authentic? I mean do you think businesses will will or could actually lead the way towards a more Equitable and and just country or or is it is it an illusion? Well, so I say two things first of all,

2 (6m 51s):
we all have reason to be skeptical. But it is a definitely a step in the right direction because frequently businesses stay out of things that are viewed as politically hot or socially uncomfortable. You know II guess I'll step back and say I believe that we need to recapture a notion of community in this country that we have a stake in our neighbors dreams and struggles as well. As our own the the way I understood Community growing up on the south side of Chicago, you know, we I think We have talked about this where every every child was under the jurisdiction of every single adult on the Block. Yeah, you messed up down the street kind of Miss Jones.

2 (7m 33s):
She go upside your head as if you were hers and then call home. So you've got it two times and I think with those are those are trying to teach us is that we belong to each other that doesn't absolve anybody of personal responsibility. It doesn't negate the necessary necessity for grit and determination and so forth, but that a community does owe something to each other and I think that is also true of the corporate community in my work in the corporate Community has been to that effect. They have been traditionally quite timid because they have customers and business relationships across the political Spectrum, but it seems to me, you know, we can move a lot more away from right and left and in the direction of right and wrong and businesses.

2 (8m 24s):
Do that without jeopardizing their commercial relationships. So I am encouraged by what I have heard, but everybody needs to watch for what these companies do and if I may when I left my second term as Governor, I founded and led an impact investing fund fund that was designed to make Equity investments in going concerns small/medium. Mm sized businesses for both Financial return and social measurable social or environmental impact and I did that at

4 (9m 2s):
Bain Capital and I was

2 (9m 3s):
proud to do it and it's it's been a terrific success and it goes on when I saw the first internal statement that Bain Capital put out to its employees after you know in the last few weeks after the George Floyd videotape, it was appropriate and restrained and measured and it's you know, it was it was Wrong with it, but it felt negotiated. It felt like what you would have expect. I'm glad there was one no doubt about it about 10 days later The Firm issued a different statement or a new statement and it talked about some of the things that was going to do interestingly hiring and promotion was a part of it, but it's not where it started.

2 (9m 46s):
It talked about taking the firm's resources and expertise. I think was a hundred million dollars. And investing it alongside coaching in black business development and entrepreneurial growth in the Greater Boston area that's action. That's the kind of thing. I'm looking for. Yeah the next step from Corporate America

4 (10m 4s):
when we come back in just a moment governor Patrick offers some thoughts on how political leaders can respond to the protests stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR.

2 (10m 20s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World.

4 (10m 30s):
Learn more at a jws dot-org.

2 (10m 39s):
Hey, welcome back to how I

4 (10m 40s):
built this resilience addition and we're going to continue my conversation with Deval Patrick, the former Governor of Massachusetts. Now a managing director at Bain Capital and it's always we got some great questions from people in the audience. We're getting a bunch of questions. This is from Alison Biggs. She asks, what concrete actions can elected officials at all levels of government take to answer the calls of protesters in cities and towns across the country. So it's a policy question. It's a tricky challenge. In question because I think if we had the answers we would be able to give them but what sort of actionable measurable things could be implemented that could actually have a significant impact very

2 (11m 21s):
quickly. So I think it's really really important that we not look for quick Solutions. I mean if they Avail themselves great, but we got here by decades and Decades of bad habits, and we're going to have to commit to undo those habits and Stick to that sustain that so we get long-term results and where and I think in some ways it starts with a kind of philosophical question. We got to stop acting as if Justice is this limited resource that gets apportioned in ways so that you know, if you get a little bit more Justice I get a little less that's not how it works. Right? There's a there is a notion much of it is instinctive, but that has practical implications about how we let the values.

2 (12m 9s):
Equality of opportunity and fair play not be one off but be Central to every decision leaders leaders met so concrete if we start with policing we've been asking the plate by the way on this point. I think it's quite true of teachers as well. We've been asking the police to do a lot more of what used to be done in other parts of the community and through other services to communities Mental Health Services domestic abuse Services can see supports, you know poverty is is sort of the underlying challenges so many of the communities where policing is excess, but I would not hear calls to defund the police what I hear at their most constructive is to rethink the range of services and supports that enable people in community to help themselves and to strengthen themselves, and that's going to be you know, From education to some of the specific social services that I'm trying to health care, right and then alongside that you know, how you teach D escalation as a first response by police.

2 (13m 23s):
We could demilitarize the police. That's a that's a path. We've been on for some while now that President Obama halted if not slowed down and President Trump accelerate. So those are a couple of things you move on up, you know, we talked about I mentioned how Healthcare briefly we've had a lot of conversation about how to move to Universal care and there are a lot of great ideas about how did that we ought to get on with that and I'm going to deal with with the need for affordable housing and I mean, you know, I'm talking as if these are things unique to black people but more and more Americans everywhere are struggling with the very same kinds of limitations on their ability to reach for the American dream,

4 (14m 8s):
which I think speaks.

2 (14m 9s):
This

4 (14m 9s):
idea that when you begin to really reckon with racial Injustice, actually, it benefits everyone. Yes from

2 (14m 17s):
a program point of view. But you know this the other thing that's happening right now is we're having a lot of conversations that are making some of our friends and colleagues and fellow members of our community uncomfortable and we're going to have to get comfortable with being uncomfortable for a little while. We just have to have those conversations by the way. That's what folks like me have had to learn how to manage. Being uncomfortable and frankly, I mean ever say fortunately I'm curious about people I'm interested in people. I have learned through lots and lots of trial and error to open my heart and leave it open and and I have discovered, you know, alongside some occasional heartbreak that there are some remarkable deep intimate loving and meaningful relationships that I've built across all kinds of all kinds of differences and I think those friends feel that way about me as well.

2 (15m 9s):
But you had to be uncomfortable yet to take a chance on that. You know what I'm saying? And I think we have to take a chance on crossing the race line as it were if we're going to get to a place of better

4 (15m 20s):
understanding I want to go back to something you talked about with pain and their initiative to support black entrepreneurs and Ventures. It's a tricky question to ask because we're in the midst of a an economic crisis, but in a sense is this a moment or an opportunity to review? Revive and Revitalize black entrepreneurship. Oh Lord. I hope so. I

2 (15m 45s):
think entrepreneurship is one of the ways that we're going to save the economy generally and I think it's a terrific way to start to build generational wealth and create opportunity among

4 (15m 56s):
black people, but you know

2 (15m 59s):
usually least in my experience guy when this conversation

4 (16m 2s):
comes up we get to

2 (16m 6s):
access to Capital and the conversation is You lie about working capital about loans and not about equity and that's different as you know, and I will tell you even in my fun when we were looking to invest alongside black entrepreneurs. There was unease sometimes and unfamiliarity often with the idea of having an equity partner come in and work alongside you and I understand that but you know, some of that is exposure and coach He and that that's why I think that part of what Bain Capital was doing and I think they're going to be others who do it is so important. It's not just money.

2 (16m 47s):
It's exposure.

4 (16m 49s):
I have got so many questions for you Allison Biggs rights. Your your medium piece is beautiful and she asks, are there other pieces of Art and media that Inspire or sustain you that you'd like more people to read or hear or see?

2 (17m 4s):
Well, you know this big this will surprise some of you but I'm a great admirer of Winston Churchill

4 (17m 12s):
and he

2 (17m 13s):
was an unlikely leader in many respects without giving away all of his story a deeply flawed person, but who had an openness to what ordinary people were experiencing and how to engage them so that they could surmount incredible challenges and and expect more of themselves as well as other leadership and I've always he's admired his model of leadership. So I go back to I think I've read just about everything that's ever been written about you. I go back to him over and over again as I do the Lincoln who I think also in crisis. Yeah grew and knew he was growing and evolving and stayed humble enough to be able to do so, which I think is always been a lesson for me and then they're you know, they're poems and paintings.

2 (18m 6s):
I love ya as

4 (18m 7s):
well. This is a That several people have asked including Claire murmur Shima. Hello Claire. Do you think this moment Governor is different? I mean because it seems like it is it seems like there is a mass movement in this country. Now that is is speaking loud and clear. I hope so, you know,

2 (18m 27s):
we have a famously short attention span in America, you know, we tend to turn to the next flashy and shiny outraged and forget what it is. We were just focused on I am feeling so grateful to the Marchers who have stayed out and on the streets overwhelmingly peaceful for as long as they have and who are insisting on more than you know, kind and sympathetic comments, but are more and more coalescing around an action plan. So I'm just incredibly grateful for them and I'm grateful for the many many others.

2 (19m 9s):
Who have unrest in their heart, but can't be out on the on the streets and are expressing themselves in ways that we see that that you know, we got to start paying attention to Justice. Again Governor Deval Patrick. Thank you so much. Thank you guy be well,

4 (19m 27s):
that's an excerpt from my conversation with Deval Patrick, the former Governor of

2 (19m 31s):
Massachusetts to

4 (19m 32s):
see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, You can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR and if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series are other virtual NPR events. You can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney, Gianna, Kappa, Dona Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR.