3 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show. I wanted to let you know about a short Anonymous survey that you can take to let us know what shows and podcasts you're listening to if you want to help you can go to npr.org / podcast survey. It won't take up too much of your time, and this is a great way to support your favorite shows. That's npr.org podcast survey and thanks. So as some of you know, we've started a new series of online video conversations where each week. I talked to Founders and entrepreneurs about how they're building resilience into their businesses right now and in case you miss these conversations when they happen live, we are posting excerpts right here in your podcast feed and today we're bringing you to conversations later in the show.

3 (48s):
You're going to hear from Gary Erickson and kit Crawford the CEOs of Clif bar, but first, we'll start with Christina Tosi. The founder of Milk Bar Milk Bar is a chain of He's with 18 locations in the US and in Canada and when Christina opened Milk Bar in 2008, the country was crumbling in the midst of a recession, but Christina was confident that her cookies were good enough to sell and she was right for $2 a piece New Yorkers would line up to buy her cookies, even in those scary unpredictable days and those instincts the ones that have pulled Christina through the recession and Hurricane. Sandy have prepared her for this moment since March. Only 5 of milk bars 18 locations remain open for pickup and delivery and three of those locations are being put to work as online bakeries where Christina and her team are sending cookies and cakes and pies to anyone around the country including health workers Christina spoke to us after a shift at milk bars commissary in Williamsburg Brooklyn where she's going in every day to make sure that cookies are getting made and that her employees are taken care of.

3 (1m 55s):
So just give me a sense. I mean you're in man. Madden are you still hearing like ambulance sirens all the time? Like what what's the vibe like for you when you just go outside

1 (2m 5s):
/ the vibe is strange. It's strange. There's not a lot of people around which for New York City is incredibly jarring in a way. There's ambulance sirens. There's not a lot of people and at 7 p.m. Every night for two minutes straight people cheer on doctors and nurses and and people that are on the front lines of Health Care Professionals. So there's this really interesting juxtaposition of solitariness that comes with sort of a half and a weight and a strangeness and perhaps a feeling of being scared and then for two minutes, it's 7 p.m. You're reminded that the only way around this is through it and we're going to get through it together and that's a reality right

3 (2m 51s):
now. Yeah, I think a lot of people are reading that that Robert Frost poem right now. The only way through is the So through it how many of your employees have been affected and how many have you been able to keep on?

1 (3m 5s):
Well, we've all been affected but from a from a work standpoint pretty early on about three or four weeks ago. We had to furlough half of our team. We started this sort of like decision tree probably two months ago of our stores five remain open for delivery and pickup but for us first and foremost It's almost like we are a business but we don't think about ourselves as a business first. We think about our team first and foremost and ask them who's comfortable working who needs to come in who's comfort and safety and livelihood actually depends on a paycheck and benefits and so on and so on and so that's been helpful at least in setting the tone.

1 (3m 47s):
But we've most certainly had to make a lot of really difficult decisions. We've had to be really smart about pivoting once we got through the team element of it then we said, Okay. Now let's look at this as a business and what we've seen is perhaps where we don't have the same opportunity in storefront or delivery. We are seeing such an incredible feat on e-comm. That is like healthcare professionals are like, okay, if I if you can't get me more ventilators, can you bring me some cookies people that are you know, they can't be with loved ones or friends on their birthdays on graduations and these me Painful moments that are still happening because we're still living life.

1 (4m 31s):
They just want to send something a tin of cookies to say, thank you. Like thank you for showing up no matter how hard it is. No matter what else it is that you're juggling in your life, whether it's child care or roommates or what have you what we're seeing is that as long as our team is comfortable showing up and turning on the ovens, you know, our mentality in our mission at Milk Bar is to show up for people it starts with showing up for one another but we And we don't take for granted this incredible opportunity to show up for people that are going through their own individual realities of the now so right now our Williamsburg kitchen is baking and rla kitchen is baking and we're trying to be really thoughtful about that and you know, we continue to realize and understand and embrace like the Simplicity but

3 (5m 25s):
the power of it hooky. I mean the kitchens in lala and Williamsburg in Brooklyn can't operate in the same way. They normally do like, how are you doing that or are you keeping people far apart? Are they wearing masks and things like

1 (5m 37s):
that? So they're spaced apart. I mean the way that we typically produced in our commissaries anyways is usually with like larger pieces of equipment. So there was already a lot of natural space. We already always wear gloves in our in all of our, you know, kitchens and stores. The face masks have been a new normal for Us and I kind of went through this wave of like how do we show up for our team and my mom and my aunt who like make all of our head scarves I said, hey if we get you every single person's name and their color preference or what have you will you make us face mask because who we are is still the same how we might be feeling is different.

1 (6m 21s):
But so they all have like these really quirky homemade face masks. They sent them all like care package. Ages the kitchen but it was like, how do we pivot it? And how do we bring lightness to it? And so we're just trying to make the most of kind of like a rainy day which is how my mom raised me to think about. You know, the trying times that are gonna happen in

3 (6m 44s):
life. Yeah, and you talked about on the podcast that we did back in October of 2019 is so such a cool story. We're getting a lot of questions for Christina. This is from Jessica van dope to Jesus. She asks him presumably for a lot of small business. There's there are a lot of emotional challenges in furloughing employees. Right? I mean this is emotionally painful for the employees and also for the employer. I mean, you know, pretty much everyone who works for you and she asked how are you dealing with your with your own mental health, you know just going through the agonizing process of doing all those

1 (7m 18s):
things. Yeah. It's heavy and it's real and I've learned enough about my mental health because by the way, When you choose working in a kitchen as a profession, it really does test your mental health it test everything, you know about yourself and I have learned for myself right now that I need alone time. I need I need time. I call it to mourn and I mean, I guess I call it to mourn because I have lost friends over the last few weeks. And so part of my alone time has been to mourn the Of life people.

1 (7m 59s):
I know until mourn the loss of life people. I don't know and to mourn the personal realities of what it feels like when you have to call someone on the phone cause you can't even sit in a room with them to tell them and I have found that furloughing an employee is hard. I try to always find the silver lining of it. And what I say to myself is I have to make the hard decisions right now to guarantee the realities of the business, right? If I don't do it now, then I can't guarantee. anyone a job that they're passionate about and a company that stands for something and it doesn't come without haften and my personal reality is I go on really long walks and I kind of segment them out and they're like my morning my morning M ourn morning walks and sometimes they come with tears and sometimes they come with like a heaviness and all those things just remind me that I'm a real person that has real feelings and that goes really connected but my commitment meant to my team Still Remains the Same despite the fact that it's just the decision might look or feel otherwise for someone in the

3 (9m 5s):
moment. I mean, can you give us a sense? Like I mean is you're given the fact that most your stores are closed and people can't really go up there except for you know, pick up and obviously even pick up traffic is going to be vastly reduced as your Revenue just just dramatically down. I mean I would imagine it

1 (9m 22s):
is. Yeah. It's in a scary place the storefronts to your point like five of 1820 that's not a lot and they're doing you know a percentage of what they were doing. I opened Milburn 2008 when the middle of a recession we barricaded down during Hurricane Sandy obviously nothing has been anywhere near as intense as this but we know how to hunker down we know how to get Nimble we know how to do a lot with a little and this is where we dig in and say where are the opportunities online. They're totally different. Ins so even where we can earn back some of what we've lost in stores no matter how far we go online.

1 (10m 7s):
Our margin structure is still really in a tricky place. Our Silver Lining is that we have been planning this we talked about this in the fall of last year, right? And when we taste we just launched into Whole Foods and I think's right week on Amazon. I mean the grocery stores. Are a tricky place to be right now too, but I'm always thinking in my head. How do I stay multiple steps ahead. I was just certainly not thinking that this is where the business would be. But in the spirit of how do we show up in people's lives. I always try and be thoughtful about being super open-minded. And so I'm grateful for some of the small wins despite the really big hits and the business is totally different right now.

1 (10m 54s):
This has always been true, but for some reason it feels so much more. True now than ever is like we have no control. Everything is breakable. We have no idea and that's not because we're not intelligent well-researched data-driven humans that run a business. It's because we have no control over it and you don't know how it will all change and we don't know how long it will take to get back and we don't know just even as if we take ourselves out of the business of running milk barge does Consumers right like On the world. What will make us feel safe. What will make us feel indulgent will make us feel. Joyful and just what will our new Norms be and how much will they change in 6 months to 12 months 18 months and so it is a fun but scary game to play and that's yeah that's reality.

1 (11m 46s):
And so you have to just face it because you can't control it and you can't get stuck in it and there's no rear view mirror being you turn look back. There's only forward and to what we said earlier like Like in Frost terms, it's like it's through it. So let's just take one step forward every

3 (12m 3s):
day. I've just totally energized me. I'm like going to run out of this with the studio and just jump up and down

1 (12m 9s):
but it's like let's rise right like this is we talked about like toad rise to the occasion.

3 (12m 14s):
Yes to that point this idea of kind of just pivoting and thinking creatively for those of you don't know Christina does a daily baking club. I think at 2 p.m. Eastern on Instagram. It's so fun. This is from Tori Parsons. He says it's been such an important part of her day helping her stay connected with her family her friends helping me helping her to adjust to the new normal. So she says thank you. How did you decide this to start that,

1 (12m 40s):
you know, when we started closing stores and we started to realize we realize this ahead of time what we started to dig into this idea of let's make videos and let's put them out people are going to be at home and baking and cooking and curious more than ever. Her about food. So let's show up for them and we filmed all this stuff and after a day of it and seeing the cuts. I was just like man. I feel like it's only halfway there. Like I think we can do better but in a really funny way better means more human and better means less produced and better means making a commitment to something to people to doing something every day because I think our reality is Shattered and how can I be a part of that and I just had a moment where I was like, I'm not in an office or kitchen everyday baking and I miss that sense of community.

1 (13m 39s):
And so I kind of just put it out there one day and it that I was like where did all these people come from? What is this engagement about and I pretty much overnight was like, okay. It's on baking club 2 p.m. Eastern Standard Time and what I thought what I love about it is as much. As it is for every single person out there that might ever want to tune in is for me to like it is I like how do I deal with the heft of furloughs and the like scary things that make me want to crawl into a corner and cry I go like it's 145. I better get my act together baking club is happening and it forces me to say we're not going to hold it heavy today Cristina, like there's one way into it and it's going to be through it and it's just a fun way to be like, oh you don't have flower guy do you have It's you can grind them down until flower.

1 (14m 29s):
Do you have pretzels you can pulverize them into a flower the ingredients swap part of it is also really really really fun because it fuels my creativity and it makes me go like we're gonna get through this and when we get through it, I have like 50 great ideas about what needs to go on the menu and the far

3 (14m 46s):
so no totally before let you go in five years like when we talk about this time period what do you hope will come out of this for you for your business that will have built resilient skin. To what you're doing,

1 (14m 59s):
I think for me my look back is that I don't want to waste it like my father-in-law Frank a Dara's like saying that he raised my partner on and that sits with me is adversity is a terrible thing to waste. I don't necessarily mean in like developing the business. So there's certainly plenty there but I don't I don't want to waste the hardship that's happening right now. Like this is what we build on. This is what grit is this is what perseverance looks like

3 (15m 28s):
Is

1 (15m 28s):
what Humanity looks like when have we ever had the time to say like I'm gonna right people handwritten notes and put them in the mail. I haven't done that in a long time and I did a whole swath of them the other day and then for me as a person it's like I am realizing that my like alone morning time is an important part of what I do. I was traveling around like a crazy person and doing all these things because I thought that is what being someone committed to their business being someone that was Riven and successful and hardworking looked like and I'm realizing that I left so much on the table with that mentality and I have so much more in me now because of the way in which I bodyguard certain parts of my being in my health and my life and for me, it's like I will I will not go back.

1 (16m 19s):
I cannot go back. I will not go back. There's no you turn. There's no u-turns allowed and and to make the most of right now,

3 (16m 26s):
I love it, Christina. For being here, it's so great to see you. I hope to see you soon. Bye guys. That's an excerpt from my conversation with Christina. Tosi founder of Milk Bar to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this or to NPR's YouTube page when we come back. We'll hear from Gary Erickson and kit Crawford the CEOs of Clif Bar who are donating millions of bars to healthcare professionals around the country. Stay with us guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. support for this podcast and the following message come from Comcast business Comcast business knows there are times when the need to connect really matters to keep customers and employees in the know and to keep business moving Comcast business is prepared for Times Like These powered by the nation's largest gig Speed network to help give you the speed reliability and security your business needs tools to manage your business from any device anywhere and a team of experts here for you 24/7 to learn more go to Comcast business.com Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition.

3 (17m 42s):
So since the pandemic began retail sales have dropped massively across the country is customers are staying home. But Cliff Bars actually seen a spike in demand because their bars are really popular among healthcare workers. I spoke to Gary Erickson and Kate Crawford from their home in Berkeley, California. Their company's been Distributing Clif bars to doctors and nurses while also trying to boost morale among their employees. Tell me a little bit about Clif Bar. What's been the situation for you guys? We're lucky. You know, we're an essential food product. We on March 12 was the day we decided to close our office is just in one day all of a sudden.

3 (18m 23s):
We're like, we're out of the office. How do we run a business when 550 people are are not in the office running into each other and having meetings and and coffee together trying to figure out so we have been adapting ever since yeah. It's interesting because we have like sort of two businesses going on. We have our office business and then we have our essential business are two bakeries one in Indiana when Twin Falls we're making sure that everybody's safe and healthy. It's really different to have to do this right now. It's crazy. So your headquarters essentially in Emeryville is closed down right now, but you also your manufacturing plants are still operating because presumably there's a demand for Clif Bar.

3 (19m 6s):
People are kind of want to keep Things that are shelf-stable and last for a while I guess is have you seen a big increase demand for Clif bars we did and we did there was a pretty good Spike at first we were maybe in third place behind toilet paper and sanitizer, but it's calm down. You know, I think the the uptick has mellowed out a little bit but we're still there's the demand demand is high and and also, you know, we know that our product is really essential food for health care. Are workers so far we've given out in the first part of March 3.6 million bars to food banks and healthcare workers online.

3 (19m 47s):
And then we're on another we're on the second round. We're now committed another 3 million through a programmer calling bake with love and sent with gratitude Carrie when you have been in crises in the past certainly with this business and when you think about it from a leadership perspective, what kind of advice could you give to somebody who is a leader even if it's a small business and they're kind of Going with what's going on right now. What's helped? What's helped us or couple things one is don't be afraid to ask question that has no answer kind of its off of a window Barry mad farmer Manifesto poem of his out for decades ago. I mean, we are asking questions every single data we have we don't have an answer to but you can't be afraid to ask those questions and then if you don't have an answer today, maybe you will tomorrow and we I can't even count how many of questions we've had to ask that don't have an answer.

3 (20m 43s):
Maybe one could be like what do we what it's going to look like when you go back to the office? Like when we first stepped back into the office. When is that going to happen? And what are we going to be walking around with right base maps on and are we going to be social distancing when we're back in the office? And how's it going to work when people, you know eat and you know, like we don't have an answer for that right now, but we're talking about and then the other part of it is just eat it. You have to be hyper attentive to everything every day minute by minute hour by hour day by day and went and if your attention to something that comes up and we get people emailing us saying have you thought of this? What about this? How come this is? How come we're not doing this then you've got to figure out then you have to go to like, how are we going to adapt and then as soon as you can take some action and don't sit on things because we don't have time to sit on things.

3 (21m 33s):
We've been making decisions where we have to act now or tomorrow and if we way out three days, sorry, we're screwed so adapt and take some action. I'm curious. I mean, obviously you are a bigger company a much bigger company than a lot of the most vast majority of businesses in United States, but if you think about this crisis and this is a little bit tricky because it's a sensitive word to use but as an opportunity are there ways to think about opportunities or to kind of focus on on the other side, like how would I mean because even with your business That you're going to change that they're going to be things about even your products that change when we come out the other side of this.

3 (22m 15s):
Yes. Yeah that made you a question. We don't have an answer to yeah. No, go ahead. Yeah. Well, I mean, I'd like to take a shot at it. I think. You know it reads as does you double down and refocus on the things that matter for us. I think it's refocused us to consider what's really really important like taking care of our people. But also how we work being efficient with our time being creative looking at a problem imagining scenarios that don't exist yet. Like well, what if this happens? What how are we going to react? It's really made us much more Nimble in some ways. Yeah for sure.

3 (22m 56s):
This is a Send from about supply chain, which I think is interesting. How are you dealing with your supply chain? And and are you looking ahead to you? Because it's you you rely on nuts and on oats and on a variety of ingredients mostly domestic but some imported. So how are you kind of dealing with the possibility supply chain will be disrupted. That's another question that we don't have a full answer to it because we don't know, you know, we're hoping that the that were On getting close to the other side, but it's still going to be probably months. We right now we're good. And because we're in that essential category, so we're not super worried about supply chain, but we're daily a back to Bei mean daily attentive to it and always kind of asking our suppliers like we're good right we're going right and we do have our procurement team our side chain every morning we meet together with we call it the covid-19 task.

3 (23m 57s):
Are so we're meeting every morning with this task force made up of you know, our manufacturing lead our legal team our HR team our community team and our Communications team and we're doing that so we can keep track of all of these things. And so we have teams under them that are tracking supply chain. All the cliff bars that are going to the stores are going to want in the future and side of balancing that out. Is this a big rush or is this going to happen, you know slowly and then you know, what level are we going to react and all that? So but it's interesting that this is a time. This is the first time that our business model is put to kind of a full test like it's easy when you're like not easy but so we have this five bottom lines business model, you know, sustaining our business Our Brands our people are our community and our planet and it's worked but now we're in the crisis trying to keep this model alive.

3 (24m 55s):
We're not just a successful company. Over here supporting our community and giving thousands of hours of community service not know we're in the fire and we're trying to continue keeping those values intact and living by those values. So so far so good but has not been easy. Yeah. There's a question from Claire morishima. She asks about the you know, you mentioned that the bars are going to healthcare workers and you know, she asked oh, how can I small company that doesn't have the resources? Sources or financial stability of a cliff bar to give away their products how what are some of my thoughts or ideas you might have about ways they can contribute really good question is a great question.

3 (25m 40s):
I mean, I don't know if we have the answer for everything like that, but there's always some way you can give whether it's supporting someone who can it's something that it's an introspective question rather than us giving the answer to its kind of like Everybody can help in some way. Maybe it's an encouragement. Maybe it's a note you spend to the hospital workers. Maybe it's you know sending someone I just a little love package, you know, there's always ways we can help and it's kind of the individual to figure out how they can do that to that point to this is the time where you know that you can do things with your business, but you can also do things for your family.

3 (26m 26s):
I My mom turned 97 last week and I baked her a lemon chiffon cake and fortunately she's not in a senior living facility. She's with my sister so I could take it to their home. You know, we added a distant saying or happy birthday. She kept wondering why we had these nests on her face and what was wrong with us, but you know, it was like just stuff like that, you know, so that's like a really personal level. There's there's a way you can do something. Awesome. Do you have any advice? I mean, I'm just even think about for me and other people listening who work with you know with small teams. How do you have with your teams?

3 (27m 6s):
Like, how are you making sure that morale is kind of at least at a certain Baseline. It's gonna be hard because morale is dropped probably across the board. But what are some strategies that you're using to just check in on people? Yeah trying to be trying to ask them personal questions a little bit, you know is how are you doing like really, how are you doing not? At just how you doing? Don't really tell me but know how are you doing? Right that that goes a long way that some you know, some people are struggling with health issues. Some people are you know doing different things that are really difficult trying to work and have children next to you is extremely hard sometimes so, you know trying to support people on a real human level, I think in business, I mean business is entirely separate from our Manatee it's just all tied together.

3 (27m 60s):
And this is just a big magnifying glass on that situation. I think when we when this first happened, it happened slowly and then all at once, you know, the sort of like, where's this going? Where's this going? We're just going all of a sudden boom. We're out of the office, but we are communicating every day with our people. I said on a Monday email. She sent out a Friday email on Thursdays. We have it all companies do meeting so we have like five hundred and thirty people. Opal and zoom while we're giving everybody an update. We have several people in the company give updates on different things. We're doing whether it's our donation program to health care workers or we read customer letters. We do all this stuff.

3 (28m 40s):
So it there's a community. There are people really appreciate that and I tell you if people are just stepping up their just stepping up during this time. Yes, amazing. I don't and I don't think leaders can lead on their own at this time. Yeah. Thank you really need each other. That's all. Our dog but you need to rely on on people and even if you have small teams, there's something that all of each of us can do right and it just yeah, it's the it's a little and that's a little and a big thing. This is this is about a long-term Journey, but it's about the people that are moving us forward Gary Erickson kick Crawford of Clif Bar.

3 (29m 21s):
Thank you so much for being with us for joining us. Thanks guys. Thank you. Hope to see you. In person soon. Yeah, and your family. Yeah, give him our best. That's an excerpt from a conversation with Gary Erickson and kit Crawford the CEOs of Clif Bar to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live conversations, you can also find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. We're going to be putting these episodes in your feed every week and hosting the conversations in real time at noon Eastern nine Pacific on Twitter YouTube. And Facebook, if you want to find out more about these conversations or other virtual and PR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org.

3 (30m 5s):
This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney, Jeff Rogers and Eva Grant. Thanks for listening stay safe, and we will see you next week. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR