1 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs about how to think creatively during this really disruptive moment. And today I'm bringing you my conversation with Sharon shooter the founder of Alma Beauty. Oh, my beauty is a Cosmetics company that makes inclusive products for a variety of skin tones Sharon's inspiration for the company came from her own upbringing in Nigeria where she just couldn't find the right makeup for her own skin tone. Went on to work for Revlon L'Oreal and benefit, but in 2018 Sharon left the corporate world to start Oma and make beauty products for women like her recently.

1 (41s):
She also started a campaign to get Beauty companies to be more transparent about the diversity of their Workforce Sharon. Join me from Los Angeles Sharon for those who don't know you or the brand you're originally from Nigeria, which we'll talk about in a moment. But but tell us more about about your brand.

3 (58s):
Yes. Oh all my beauty is the range. Of color Cosmetics where highly inclusive brand I found it on the beauty because I was frustrated with the state of the beauty industry. I was working with in Beauty for the longest time and just got frustrated with how non-inclusive it was and in 2017 2018. They still were not catering to most people, you know, they were only catering to one particular audience and that frustrated me. So I wanted to go and create a movement. I wanted to create a brand where everybody could find themselves and all my beauty is a brand that has been founded on inclusion self-love. Of expression authenticity and really enabling and inspiring people to show up every day as the best selves and we were very fortunate to have launched our with also support and 203 stores and Loans in the UK as well as selfridges and you know, it's been an amazing year.

3 (1m 46s):
We're only one year in the market and continue to challenge the industry continues to be outspoken continues to be Advocates whilst at the same time having fun and play with makeup and creating things that everybody can feel welcome any citizen

1 (1m 57s):
and I was I was checking out the website last night and you've got this really be cool feature on the site where you basically choose your complexion your skin tone and there's like I think six kind of general and then and you narrow down further and and that helps you pick out right the colors. Everybody is different. Right and I think that's the prisoners of the world. We

3 (2m 16s):
keep pretending like we're just saying we're not the same what your skin needs is completely different to what my skin needs yet everywhere. And even the ones who were claiming to be inclusive will create the same product for everybody, but the needs a completely different so we created six different skin families and then Customize the formulas between each families to Target the unique needs of your skin to Target the way your skin is structured the common concerns of your skin. So we put that all together in a foundation and that's why our website is built that way where you start from. What's my skin family which is of identifies where you are and then you go down. We've got 51 shade so it can be overwhelming. So we help people really consolidate because once you find your skin family, you only have to select between six to twelve Shades depending on your skin family we help you work out you're under Tone, which is, you know, all about the shade of your skin.

3 (3m 3s):
And once you've done that you really have only three products to select from so it makes it super easy super intuitive to shop through a 51 shade foundation rate, which for women can be quite daunting

1 (3m 12s):
just for the record. I got Olive.

3 (3m 14s):
I love it. I love you, honey, honey. I

1 (3m 18s):
love ya, honey. Yeah, I wish I had some this morning because I had like a little spot. But anyway, that's another

3 (3m 24s):
story. Well makeup is for everybody

1 (3m 26s):
and I absolutely my

3 (3m 27s):
ex-husband use my concealers all the time. Like when you have dark circles, it would cover them. He will have like, you know imperfections. So he wore makeup even though he was the most manly man and I mean a lot of his friends didn't know that because of just Society is not ready for it. But he did your makeup even though he was like supposed to score the

1 (3m 43s):
skin. Do you know I think a lot of men do that like I I remember like I'm several occasions, especially when like we've done family photos. I've taken my wife's concealer and just like put it under my I've done that I'm gonna admit that. I mean, I think a lot of men do

3 (3m 58s):
that nobody do but they just hide it and don't talk about it because yeah, I have like oh makeup is a thing to cheeks use and it's not for men and it's like no it's for everybody and anybody who's on TV there is make out like they put it to mattify the skin, you know to accentuate certain parts of the camera can catch it better. So every man who's on TV it is used. Cough so as the yes, I'm sure you you

1 (4m 19s):
grew up in Nigeria. I think in Legos, right? Is that right?

3 (4m 22s):
Well, I grew up in a lot of parts of Nigeria my family moved around a lot because my dad was a hotel. Yay. So I do I spend a lot of time and Legos I spend time you worry. I consider myself a worry girl. People don't know where worries. It's like a joke about people like, you know, how long but like yeah. I'm like, oh, you know come to me yet. Okay, make it like 30 times more extreme and you've got worried like it is it is Hardcore. It is really like so much. Culture it is Street. It is wild and that was where I spent the longest time, but he's an unknown place on the map, but it's very very tutorial. So just being that place

1 (4m 54s):
every time a really great article about you and it talked about how like really early on like, you know, just write a college you got into into working with Revlon and I guess it kind of stemmed from your childhood where you were frustrated that you couldn't get Revlon products in Nigeria. Is that is it

3 (5m 8s):
right? Exactly exactly. I think you know for me one of the most common themes in my life is always standing up for what I believe is right and always For better world, you know from being expelled when I was in high school for mobilizing everybody to go on strike because it was the conditions weren't great and I had to you know, mobilize them for to go on strike so they went on strike what we wanted to got it but I was a scapegoat. So that's why I labeled a troublemaker, right? So, you know leaving college and going hey, why don't we have the color cosmetics in Nigeria and I reached out to all the brands and revin was the only one who responded positively and they've been trying to come into the country for 15 years and they couldn't and it's super like the craziness. S of a teenager not knowing how to take no for an answer and that was how I got into the beauty space because you know, it's really showed me that I had two sides to me in terms of I always been very academic.

3 (5m 58s):
I've been in high school at 15. So there was like you have a PhD at 19, you know, you are not clever. I was one of those gifted kids and by also be very very artistic. So Beauty gave me a home to put those two things together in terms of the creativity and the academics of it all and you

1 (6m 12s):
did eventually get Revlon in into Nigeria you On to work for L'Oreal you work for lvmh. I think you ran operations for benefit and you quoted an article talking about how even now in African countries. The Cosmetics available are really kind of designed for lighter skin tones even

3 (6m 30s):
now absolutely, you know, I did a whole series on my Instagram stories once where I was traveling as I was traveling I was showing them what was available in South Africa in South Africa, you go into the department store that you can't find Dark Shades and that's ridiculous. You know, it's just completely ridiculous a lot of countries that are American countries to come find it and what's also sad it's because of the effects of colonialism even in Africa the standard of beauty still very angles eccentric is still here first, he needs to straight hair the biggest skincare products in Africa extremely cheap products, you know out here is anti-aging there is skin bleaching because everybody wants to be lighter, you won't have some people putting their music so musicians putting the music to go all light-skinned girls and how they prefer light-skinned girls. You hear men talk about this part.

3 (7m 11s):
Hopefully that I love my girls to be like skin. So all the girls that you know going to be And this was actually a big problem because you started having products with metre high dose of hydroquinone in formaldehyde really bad stuff that we're not allowed to tell here people were making them and sending them down there and just having people, you know helps be at risk. So it's really sad and I remember going up even in Nigeria. They will have to use my ex-wife's talcum powder as a faith-based because there was nothing you know, and then there was like three shades of what weeks ago pancake pancake is old original foundation made by Max Factor the article pancake Three Shades and everybody will Robin and look orangey and look crazy and that wasn't available. So it's crazy when you think about it.

3 (7m 52s):
It's so

1 (7m 52s):
cool that your experiences LED you to founding this company last year. How are you guys doing? I know you still a small company. I think you've got about 10 or 15 employees. How are you? How are you doing? Right now?

3 (8m 4s):
You know I the moment we're told people, you know, we were much bigger team last year and We Shrunk it down the strategically this year because last year we're going way too quickly for my liking like they've got fried steak. You know what I feel like Like to take a poll slow down, it builds the foundation of the brand properly because if you don't build a foundation all the good that you get it's going to collapse at some point. So for me, it was a marathon not a Sprint. So I deliver a strong the size of my team. Most of my business actually comes from retail. We launched it two hundred and three hundred Souls from selfridges, you know in off the street which is massive business, right? So our business actually came from retail and one of the challenges we had was when we launched the Retailer's names almost overshadowed the brand name everybody knew all my beauty Ulta that was sort of what they knew, right?

3 (8m 45s):
So people were by an ultra.com not our website. So that was an issue that we had coming into this year did the way the pandemic has addressed for us because all of a sudden people started seeing us as an entity outside Ulta or selfridges or all our Retail Partners, and now we now have a business where right now my dog cam is now over 70 percent almost 80% of wow this so what's happened to us in the end. It's allowed us get more intimate with our customer. Yeah, and that has really driven a lot of growth. So I'll go cam is making way more money than

1 (9m 15s):
Of

3 (9m 15s):
our retailers used to make this really allows people to see us for who we are we outside the shadow of the retailer. So actually goal who is all my view. Yes and Brian, what are they they getting to know me whereas before I was so busy. I was always on planes. I did not have time to do it. Yeah use or we all live or have the level of intimacy that I now have with my customers.

1 (9m 34s):
That's interesting. Yeah, so Ulta and and selfridges huge distribution platforms for now, of course, it's all through the website. We're getting a bunch of questions. This is from Lisa Norris. Are your products SPF rated and

3 (9m 48s):
waterproof? Well waterproof? Yes SPF. I make a point not to put SPF in my products for two reasons. Once you confuse SPF into a product. It becomes very hard to perform on dark skin because it's a white face. That's why they only make the light shades because you know, once you put in SPF, it changes the base whites. So when you're going to really like on my skin complexion of be okay, right because of our formula, but when you get into the real deep shade it starts growing back this gray kind of flashback that I don't like so I don't Put it in there. And I also think another thing about SPF is a very personal thing people don't realize this the SPF needs for phrases really fair skin is different to the SPF need for the dark skin and Stephanie also changes based on what thinking using do you use retinol.

3 (10m 29s):
Do you use any product that you know counter the Sun that would change your requirements people should always buy the SPs separate into their products and I know people want to do for convenience, but it's really critical because SPF is so unique to what you doing with your skin and a lot of times it's giving byproducts will have 15 SPF right so wait for my time because I need 50 for me because I just want to know what's right. I'd rather just use the SPF. I'm going to use anyway, and then use the first independently

1 (10m 55s):
and as we just learned how I built this recent episode we did on supergroup the sunscreen brand. You can't just put it on in the morning and that's it. Like you've got to put on every couple

3 (11m 2s):
hours two hours. Is that if you

1 (11m 4s):
I

3 (11m 4s):
know that you put on SPF in the morning, right? And yes, you will set it for the day, but that's the only lasts two

1 (11m 9s):
hours. Thank you for that question Lisa. Okay. I want to turn to something that kind of got you into the news recently you issued a call to action for corporations to publicly disclose particularly in the in the in the beauty industry the percentage of black employees. They have Executives and board members and use the hashtag pull up or shut up and you got like responses from glossier and L'Oreal and Sephora. Tell me about this idea. How did it come about and what yeah tell me about

3 (11m 38s):
it. I think it came out of frustration. I was extremely frustrated because like I said, it was a reason I set up my brand was to decent reason companies not be inclusive companies not hiring black people, you know right now in America. The black adult population is just over 13% The black participation in Corporate America is 8% in leadership roles equals 3 40% They are 615 billionaires in the country. Only six of them are black every single level you look at there is this economic Isolation of black people which is creating an economic and inequality, right and and that Gap is getting wider and wider, you know during this pandemic the billionaires in this country. The Network's went from two point nine trillion dollars to three point four trillion dollars. The reason is getting richer the poor are getting poorer after the wake of this this second wave of black lives matter movement with the death of George Floyd, which was so personal, you know, it was it really hurt our community and the rest of the world and what I saw of companies, do you was performative activism all of a sudden they wanted to get into social issues you No.

3 (12m 34s):
Oh, yes, you know nice. He dropped the commercial within 48 Hours. Don't do it. Everybody was applauding it became a competition for who can donate to the most I'm gonna give a hundred thousand to n-double-a-cp. I'm gonna give a million dollars and no point in time. Did they think about what role have they played in marginalizing people? So the same company that you go through their social fear that you cannot see a black face. They do not have black employees. They do not have black Executives and then the same people telling their followers that you have to do. Something you cannot stay silent. So I thought this was a really good opportunity because they came out and spoke, right? Okay. Yeah speaking your money where your mouth is. And actually if I change your companies are racist.

3 (13m 16s):
Your companies are riddled with unconscious bias. Your companies have so much micro aggressions against black people. That's why I left corporate world when I left. I had a nervous tic. I was so sorry and everybody says to me about your Smite to corporate you became an executive. I'm like, I didn't Thrive I survived and that was what this campaign was for. It was we have to stand for Change and change has to stop somewhere and it starts with transparency and accountability because guess what only consumers can affect change because companies only listen to Dollars That's What proportion of course it was a direct action movement that said, you know what let's say this conversation public. Let's put the book back to the consumer. Let the consumer make the decision. Do you want to see black people within organizations or do you not want to see black within organizations and the key message from places saying it's not the same company just go out and hire people because it back it's saying Stop not hiring us because we're black.

3 (14m 6s):
So this was a such an important and critical moment for us to finally hold Banks accountable for X to get past this before meeting activism. And you know, social media Justice League kind of thing and get it to real action

1 (14m 18s):
when we come back and just a moment. We'll hear more from Sharon about how Corporate America can do better and what actions they can take Beyond just performative activism stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition and we're talking with Sharon shooter the founder of oma Beauty Sharon's also been getting a lot of attention for pull up or shut up her social media campaign that asks Beauty companies to disclose how many black employees Executives and board members work there.

1 (15m 14s):
I read a quote of yours. You said I haven't slept in days. I have been able to manage my business because you've been working on this initiative. Active but you said it's all it's all been worth it. It's worth it if somebody but this is a human

3 (15m 25s):
rights issue. Everybody does sympathize Spice in your choice, right and see somebody sucked the life out of him with their handcrafted in the pocket. Everybody sees that part and everybody's talking about police brutality. What I'm talking about here is the course, you know police brutality is in fact, this is the cause the cause is marginalization. So why has this country done? I'm since the Emancipation declaration. They have put enormous amount of money to law enforcement enormous amount of money being taken. Some people say to law enforcement, right? So you take people you don't give them opportunity to participate in the economy companies about giving you Jabs when you go and set up a business zero point zero zero zero six percent of funding dollars goes to black women yet black women are the fastest group of interpreters in this country.

3 (16m 8s):
They said a business is faster than any racial group in this country yet. There is no funding. So it's topping out if you look at all the black successful Brands right now, most of them bootstraps. It was I started with $5,000. Sighs I started be $2,000. Yeah, while the average white male gets 2.2 million dollars to set up a nice a business. The average amount of money given to a black woman is $42,000. That is what I say ssion sure,

1 (16m 32s):
you know as you know, like our I think our instinct is humans is to see a problem and then find a solution right like as an entrepreneur. That's what you do. Like. You saw a problem in the marketplace and you want to solve it similarly with with like this incredibly important profound renewed and new. And around racial Justice that's really been inspired by the mass demonstrations. I mean, there's no question about it demonstrations work. Like they really do work people. They can change

3 (17m 0s):
history. They've always Changed History exactly

1 (17m 4s):
when it comes to some of these big questions you're talking about especially with respect to Corporate America, you know, this performative activism versus action

3 (17m 13s):
is any part of you encouraged

1 (17m 15s):
about the possibility of real change or are you still like kind of skeptical? Cool and kind of standing back and saying wait and see. Well,

3 (17m 23s):
I'm not because this time we're taking it into our own hands, you know, that's why I started this movement. We're not going to just sit and wait and see you know, I'm a dreamer. I'm a crazy one. You know what I mean? Like invite thought this was all the ways that this was just PR for the sake of PR. I'll be running my business and making money will not be, you know, spending my whole time doing this right. So I think for me it's like I do believe that we can affect change. I do believe that the consumers have the power. I believe that if they keep up on this companies will change Within Years will be having a different conversation it would change right so I see a pathway to change because right now I'm seeing what's happening behind the scenes. This companies are in shambles right now. They're running around like headless chickens because they have no answers, you know, most of the leadership teams are not diverse all of a sudden they're not looking to their employees.

3 (18m 7s):
So they haven't even promoted to management level say come and fix it, you know come and fix it. And this is what they've been doing pulling this employees into new diversity teams. And this is also been a frustration of me as well and I've spoken about this don't take someone who has a full-time job just Because a black and tell them come and fix my diversity issue. Well do your full-time job. That's not fair and that's what if something isn't done because what they see is that the entire ecosystem is broken. The HR Mario's have to be re-written, you know companies to our HR Mario's the discriminate against black hair because all black cast of the considered unprofessional I got told to my face but my indeed when I was in my corporate life, then I couldn't wear brakes work. It was unprofessional. It was ghetto and I had too much potential to be presenting myself like that so I went for it.

3 (18m 50s):
Years, right not wear briefs. I live in Beverly Hills people see me walking my dog and they woke up today go like, oh, you're the dog walker who's the owner of this dog? You know, so one of these things in isolation is not a big deal. But when is your reality every day? Come on, like give us a break and this will be called unconscious bias is just think that people just do instinctively without thinking about it. And that's what we have to have this conversation because the only way to break anything you do in your unconscious is by consciously counteracting it and that's why we Need these to be to be talked about thank you

1 (19m 22s):
for for having that conversation. I mean you raising incredibly important and profound issues and questions and and something you shouldn't have to

3 (19m 31s):
do. You know, what's been really interesting and

1 (19m 34s):
proves my point about unconscious bias. Right

3 (19m 36s):
when we went over this country. We had a lot of White America. We just felt really attacked. They felt like oh, so are you telling companies now the Y position have job like this is a problem that we have it almost seems like you kind of have a probe like conversation without people feeling like it's an anti white conversation. Yeah. I'm happy. A probe like conversation. I'm talking about a human rights issue and your responsibilities are my job is not risk, but no your job is to hurt wrist. Like it's mind-boggling that if you don't understand it's like oh but you talking about ratio dividing people we are divided. We are divided people are getting killed on the street. That's the country we live in and you're telling me that me saying hey stop not hiring us because we're black is me dividing the country. I'm now though, I'm not the bad person and that just shows you the level of unconscious bias that At the people who are publicly commenting about this kind of a see there's anything wrong with what they say.

3 (20m 25s):
They're so uncomfortable with this. All they're saying is another black person complaining and I've got person saying the word block which is super toxic and missing the whole damn point

1 (20m 35s):
Sharon when you think about this moment in history and everything that's happening in five years time when you when we look back at this moment, what do you want to be able to say about about how you change as a leader and how you took ideas from this moment and Them to everything you do.

3 (20m 52s):
Yeah. I hope in five years time that we are seeing you change right? I hope in five years time is going to be yes, we all came together as a community because the irony of this is actually a unification moment. It's time for us to unite in it's time for us to unite against one common enemy and that common enemy systemic oppression, right and systemic racism. That's why I want us to remember this time as the time that the world finally came together and made a change for the better because guess what diversity is good for business diversity. She is absolutely blinking good for business and I want in five years time for even the businesses who went through the pain right now, but D step up and do the right things to be the ones who are leading and going wow diversity was actually good at for business.

3 (21m 34s):
I can't believe it took so long to do it. And that's where I want us to be in five years. And that's why I want to sit back and reminisce about this moment with a lot of positivity and Wang going when things were difficult. We all chose to not do what was popular not do it was comfortable with all chose. To do what was right and see how much better the world is for it because we did what was

1 (21m 54s):
right Sharon shooter founder of Loma BV. Thank you so much. Thank you for having me guys - such a pleasure. That's an excerpt from my conversation with Sharon Shuda the founder of oma Beauty to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience, Series or other virtual and PR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney Gianna. Cappadonna, Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening.

1 (22m 34s):
Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.