4 (0s):
Hey everyone, welcome to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm guy Roz. So today we've got excerpts from two recent live conversations from our new video series. You can catch them every Wednesday and Friday at 12:00 Eastern on our Facebook page later in the show. We'll hear from John Stein the founder of betterment and investment startup about what to not do with your money right now, but first my conversation with Toby luedtke the founder of Shopify the e-commerce platform that powers more than a million online stores. Toby was a Ston how I built this back in August of 2019. And if you want to hear his backstory and how he lived with his in-laws for 10 years while building Shopify, you can find that in our podcast Q.

4 (41s):
Anyway, since the pandemic began Shopify his actually seen a spike in new customers setting up eCommerce sites. Same thing by the way happened to Shopify after the financial crisis of 2008-2009. Toby join me from his home in Ottawa Canada where he's helping Merchant stay afloat while managing Thousands of employees so I'm Toby right now in terms of shopping. I'm you've got I think 5,000 employees and offices in Canada and abroad how are people working right now presumably remotely.

1 (1m 11s):
Yeah, exactly. Imagine like everyone else at least in the technology industry is doing it like they have slack which is taking over the role of the hallways of office. I'm jumping from Google me to Google meet heard now basically all day long, there's so much nuva has to be figured out like I used to just sort of walk around and meet people and it's much easier to say, yes. To meeting after meeting but one thing that really is special is chop. If I sort of found its role doing a recession the felt there was something specific for us to do that would actually help other people people are losing their jobs and almost like a fallback to plan B for realize we're always wanted to do this thing and tried it and like we were eight people that ran now the 5,000 people like it's amazing to see exactly the same spirit.

1 (1m 56s):
I made the team which is fat our job is to get more small businesses, too. Five, that's the only thing that matters right

4 (2m 3s):
now. You've got I think a million eCommerce sites all around the world. Tell me a little bit about what trends you've been sitting. I mean because you thought in 2008-2009 when Shopify was just a people that you were finished at that financial crisis was going to wipe you out the exact opposite happened people started to sign up for Shopify. People are losing their jobs said, all right. Well, I might as well pursue this idea that I had and and are you seeing a similar kind of trend now or is this

1 (2m 29s):
different? Yeah. Nobody is seeing a similar Trend. It's a lot of more traditional business especially have now come to us to do exactly that we have had Heinz Ketchup go online, which is a hundred fifty one-year-old company that I don't think if I expected to go direct to Consumer, but everyone's facing the same problems and you know in seven days they stood up a site and know you can buy catch up online and it's it's obviously in a lot of adaptability where Maybe Previously, it might just not have existed in the same way. And I think that's hopefully she'll

4 (3m 5s):
be he said something in our interview on the podcast. I'm going to kind of mess up your quote here, but it's something like as an entrepreneur you always live in two states of mine one state of mind is if we do this will be unbeatable and we're doing great. It's all working out and then the other state of mind is complete dread. We're dead. Are you do you still experience those two thoughts right now,

1 (3m 28s):
totally I think the thing that changes as a When he gets bigger, is that the oscillation between those two things just keeps getting faster and it's like I have a pretty incredible job now and I see in some cases it's these incredible people who are setting up from completely new Journeys and kind of excited about this on the other side. It's I mean, this is a real challenge. We also some serious hardship out there and it's Challenge in a way that I don't think anyone like no one would sign up for it's this like hey everything I knew is now invalidate it I have to re-derive Right here. I have about my business every single idea I have about being able to meet payroll or who I'm working with or in which way I'm showing up or what my brand actually stands for.

1 (4m 12s):
It's a crazy situation, but this keeps going and even been a company is at the point that Shopify is that like I often go through these mental States back and forth in the same day. It's you sort of get used to it, but not really

4 (4m 27s):
all which is why I love about you because you are the head of a The CEO of a 5,000 person company it's doing very well. And I love that you still have self-doubt and and that you talked about it and I think that's super important and healthy. I mean if you an idea or you kind of wanted to launch something for a while it is now a good time to do it. I guess it's hard question to answer but are there opportunities now given what's going on around the world a surprising

1 (4m 54s):
number of the best companies in the world have been launched at the depths of recessions. Well, okay. So the wavy You're talking about is internally it is from what we've seen 2030 basically got pulled to 2020 forward and all trends that relate to digitalization again, all these businesses that only will retail just disappeared. There's a vacuum that were left behind which they are scrambling to fill in the businesses that were more digitally native business that have retail but also we're online and on the different channels like Instagram or Pinterest they have replaced over. E % of their lost sales and so it's not really that people have stopped spending money the mix of how people spend the money has changed its a lot more online.

1 (5m 39s):
It's a lot more on the kinds of products that you need around the house. So that is a backdrop against which amazing entrepreneurial stories can be written because there is just opportunity, especially on the recovery site where people can just have your options on the market and I think that's a lot of people now have a new understanding of what the word Probably going to be like, I don't think you're going to go back to a world. We had you're going to forward into something

4 (6m 5s):
different. Yeah, I mean Toby this is the thing. Like I've been looking at companies that have started at difficult times. I mean slack then Mo I mean all these brands that we used there's actually an amazing supermarket chain in the United States called Publix. It was started in 1930, you know, the beginning of the Great Depression and struggled for like 10 years and today employees 200,000 people and is an enormous company. And anyway, I just I think that's an important. Important point to make as an entrepreneur. It's a scary time right but to your point. I mean there are still reasons to get in there right and put your hat in the ring

1 (6m 39s):
and you need to be extremely comfortable as an entrepreneur charging into the unknown because that's literally what you committing yourself to doing a recession. There is an advantage that is not just you doing it. It's everyone has to do it. So in a way it's more equal environment. I also think that the formative years of companies end up mattering a lot more than I think anyone's willing to admit like I can absolutely see a supermarket chain found it the right at the dawn of a Great Depression having a more sustainable attitude towards expenses and you will pick up skills based on your experiences during your formative years and I think I can see how that's

4 (7m 17s):
helpful. Tell me. What kind I mean, what are some kind of like types of stores? You've seen people launched in recent weeks any examples that stick out

1 (7m 26s):
one of the most amazing things is like right up at the earliest time. Like when Sheldon plays happened and we saw new businesses and and some existing business pivot towards mask making which is of course becoming much more important. We all know that there's significant shortage in PPE and some people we do with this nigga factories to create masks and a lot of people drove efforts from home. That's one of the things we saw but other thing is it's just been an enormous Community effort of bringing sort of a favorite local businesses online so that they can do curbside pickup. Or even do deliveries in the neighborhood and what's been remarkable is that that we've seen some of these businesses actually do better than we've ever done before it's not the rule but like we hear this in our cause of our customers and like just sort of local even local newspaper stories, which is really really

4 (8m 17s):
awesome. What if you were planning on launching a product or service right before the pandemic happened and here you are out in the world. You've got a Shopify store front and you're trying to generate interest, but you can't Be out in the world. What are ways that people are able to Market and to to spread the word about what what it is that they're operating. I think

1 (8m 37s):
it's a better time than ever to do this food specifically social media. There's a lot more attention there. I mean, it depends a lot on your product of course, but we found the most some random sub categories of products ending up doing extremely. Well. One of my favorite examples of this is decorative tapestries, which I never would have imagined beings, but what one Realize hey that's sort of a real-world zoom background kind of accessory. Then you realize why people are now buying decorative tapestries and wall art and like I think what you have to ask yourself is like this product. I'm creating. How does this fit into the story of a times? I mean, this is always a question. You should ask yourself, but I think now especially if you can tell your product fits better in the future that's emergent or fits in well over time since also real problem, you will find an incredibly receptive

4 (9m 27s):
audience. You know, we had I'm Stuart Butterfield on from slack a couple days ago and Stuart acknowledge there is sort of this kind of weird position that he's in which is slack is obviously doing very well because of the crisis so many people are relying on slack to communicate your in a similar position. I mean most businesses are not doing well. Now the Shopify of course has benefited from so many people signing up. I mean, obviously it's good for your company or publicly traded company. You've got a responsibility to you know series of constituents, but I don't know. Is there something a little weird about it to ya.

1 (10m 0s):
Now it certainly is I don't exactly know how I feel about as either. I mean when one thing I can do is try to share any good fortune coming our way like the most wonderful thing about Shopify is that we can actually make a difference right? We will work at Shopify or slack. We all made life choices that meant he didn't wind up being doctors or nurses or Frontline workers. So it's very hard for us to join were real heroes of this crisis. And make a difference in the most important realm but at least we are Shopify we can make a significant impact on the second wave economic crisis that comes from a humanitarian crisis.

1 (10m 41s):
Like we really really believe believe that merchants and the small business and entrepreneurs are such an important part of the economy like more than fifty percent of people in the world work for small businesses. So what we try as much as we can is launch everything even if you're uncomfortable about the quality if you have something in the pipeline in the roadmap that makes a Right. Now we are currently getting this out of a door. So we are trying like we bring everything forward like local delivery curbside pickup. All these things are things that we are trying to build better software for because here's what happens like we brought 20 30 10 years forward. So that also means we all are in 2030 right now the circuit 2020 quality software. If you go back and try to use quasi 2010 quality software.

1 (11m 25s):
You remember it to be really good. But if you try it it's not it's 10 years out of date. So We found ourselves not facing problems without software of the quality that we would like to take into the to solve problems. And we're trying to catch up only

4 (11m 39s):
20 30 situation with 20/20 software. Essentially. That's yeah, that's interesting here. Here's a question that a version of a question. I'm getting to Siobhan Lee asked this question on Facebook and others. How is what's happening now going to change the way Shopify works the way you operate.

1 (11m 58s):
Yeah, I think a good culture is not defined. By keeping it a certain way. In fact, I think the way a lot of companies end up destroying their own culture is by seeing it as a static thing that has to be kept rather than wanting to evolve it with the situation that they are in like it's impossible to have the same culture in a five people company as you have in the 500 people company, but what you can have is a great culture in both and one of them can evolve into the other like overtime. So this is really what it's about. So do you have to be adaptable they will all change like again, but I think we're office centricity is going to change we will have a lot more Norms about the way we work together and work together maybe digitally by default.

1 (12m 42s):
But we also seeing things which are good. Right? Like I think one thing that I've learned personally is that a meeting with people were remotely is significantly better if everyone is in their own tile instead of if some people are in the same room

4 (12m 57s):
totally, how often have you been in a in a in a video?

1 (12m 60s):
Meeting where

4 (13m 0s):
you're looking at a conference table was like nine people around the conference table and it's just not your so right. I never thought about that everyone getting their own tile makes it a

1 (13m 10s):
better meeting it absolutely does and I think then you have a lot of meeting rooms. Like I can't tell you the last time I was in a meeting with just local people like Shopify is like distributed because we have more offices as a younger company than I think most companies especially in Silicon Valley do so. We were always in inaudible Toronto Montreal and Waterloo and Noble in Vancouver and This is concerned. And so I have not been to a meeting with just look at people in a long time. I think I know something about what it's like to be with one person on the zoom call and not wanting to interrupt and offices. So we're learning about a good way to work together. Is it as good as the previous one and probably not but it has a different set of trade-offs and I think this is is a new break in the foundation of modern company and on top of that you can build great cultures if you want to tell me how is this

4 (13m 57s):
changed you as a leader? I mean you started this company with your so On you oversee 5,000 people and I mean, how do you think it's changed the way you operate as a leader? And the way you think about what it means to be a leader?

1 (14m 9s):
I am learning a lot. I mean before this I used to do an AMA ask me anything about once a quarter with the entire company. I was sort of an in-person event again now, it's something I'm doing weekly like I've been hosting every town hall sins because I think just the entire company has incredibly Clarity of mission. Right now again about what we set out to do but exactly how we do this really left to all these parts of a company. We love to be Loosely coupled but Loosely coupled only really works when we come together and base our decisions on the same fundamentals. So just the amount of communication and the ways to communicate have evolved so much give you one example, like for instance.

1 (14m 51s):
I loved spending time with my product teams. I love getting into deep detailed like engineering conversations. This used to be like, I just walked into A part of a team that worked on this and then we did a little workshop and I can't do this anymore. But one thing I do have a really good video setup now and I think this is something everyone survived like hitting red record button is really cheap going through a flow or mock-up and just talking about this and then putting this into the right selection. Oh, it's not as good because it's not as fun because it's the interactivity is missing, but then I get a video back and responds and suddenly I'm like, hey, this is diminished. But also a lot more efficient and by the way, I can do this with more groups.

1 (15m 34s):
So I think just keeping an open mind about how to reproduce the situations that you appreciate it before in new voices is just such an important ingredient in this war thing

4 (15m 44s):
Toby. Thank you so much and hope to see you again soon Toby. Thank you so much.

1 (15m 51s):
Absolutely. Thank you so much for doing it love the show and it's bring us all closer together and these conversations are invaluable. So thank you so

4 (15m 58s):
much. That's an excerpt from my Our relation with Toby luedtke the founder of Shopify to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and look up videos when we come back. We'll hear from John Stein the founder of betterment and the trends he seing might surprise you stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from

1 (16m 19s):
NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn

4 (16m 35s):
more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So around the time Shopify started to take off. John Stein was in New York trying to start betterment. This was in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. We profiled betterment back in October 2018 on the podcast. Anyway, I spoke to John just a few days ago. He's Sheltering in Upstate New York, and he talked about how to invest wisely during an economic crisis and what the road to recovery might look like for his company and the whole financial This is industry. I'm wondering John. I mean when the market starts to dive Peoples Natural reaction is to pull money out because they're freaking out.

4 (17m 21s):
You know, they don't know how low it's going to go. Have you seen significant numbers of your customers, you know, withdraw their money or some of their money you

1 (17m 31s):
bet and I have so many anecdotes about this and it changes every day right starting off. My own parents called me up and said John were thinking about withdrawing some Honey, it just make us more comfortable to do. So. This was the day the S&P 500 reaches absolute bottom and I said, I just I think we've talked about this the idea is to stay the course for going to manage your money smarter over the long term. You don't need to react in the moment and they said well it would just make us more comfortable to have a little more cash on the site. Is it your plan is we've already got enough of a safety net for you. You're fine for the next few years. You don't need it, but people react emotionally to the market and I guess I'm just telling that anecdote to say it happens to me my own.

1 (18m 12s):
To fortunately they kept most of their money invested, but I couldn't stop them from throwing a little bit. I think it's interesting that among all of our customers only 2% more customers withdrew in March then did in a normal month for us and by far more customers were depositing that withdrawing so 26% more of our total customer base was depositing ad hoc. Not just Auto deposit, but actually actively putting more money in then pulling money out and for millennials. The most interesting thing is that for Millennials. It was 37% more we're putting ad hoc money and then withdrawing and there's something there about how these younger customers are reacting differently to this crisis than say the Boomers or Gen X is

4 (18m 58s):
reacting to it. So John, I'm curious. I mean, there are some people are withdrawing money because they are worried about their financial situation. If they have a small business. The revenue is not coming in its some people are being furloughed mean your Depends on accounts on more and more accounts, right because your margins are so thin I mean, you're only charging a quarter of a basis point to manage people's money, which is tiny as Tiny amount of money. So what explains the fact that your overall business isn't affected by it that your Revenue stream seems to be more or less the same so

1 (19m 31s):
we are affected we feel it too. But I feel lucky in many ways that we're not say dependent upon people to come in to a branch. CH or into a physical retail location in order to hand US money for our service his right. We are a digital business and right now actually digital financial services

4 (19m 54s):
are doing

1 (19m 56s):
I'd say as one of my board members said to me this this week at our meeting your the top quadrant things might be tough, but you're lucky that you're not say a restaurant, you know, there's so many businesses that are that are being hit hard. We're Seeing record sign up numbers. We're seeing people coming to us and you know, it's interesting because especially younger people are losing jobs in our survey of Millennials. I think it was 33% of gen Z lost jobs in our survey due to covid versus only about 8% of the Baby Boomers had lost jobs. And so you can have that 15, you know, total unemployment you can see who it's impacting.

1 (20m 38s):
It's impacting everyone but particularly younger people and yet there. The ones who are more likely right now than ever before to be signing up. We're just seeing a surge in especially young people signing

4 (20m 49s):
up and the survey you're referring to you guys surveyed about 5,000 investors and its public its on your blog and I look through it. You would think that investors like experienced investors who wrote out the 2008 financial crisis would be more resilient today and would be kind of watching this and saying, you know, let's let's roll with this and it but actually what you found is that they are not any less stressed out than new investors like in some ways they are We're stressed out. Exactly and I think

1 (21m 15s):
part of that is if your time Horizon is short

4 (21m 17s):
to need that money. You're going to be more

1 (21m 19s):
Panic than if you have, you know, another 20 plus years to save and invest in you know, you know, that's for the long-term. You don't have to worry about it, but I don't think that fully explains it because you know for investors who are closer to retirement, we're recommending more conservative portfolios. We're putting them into more cash or putting them into more bonds that are less volatile

4 (21m 39s):
in times like these and

1 (21m 40s):
nevertheless. They're more likely Lee to withdraw than the younger customers listen, I don't know I'm hypothesizing but I think there's just something about those of us or people even younger than me. I shouldn't include myself in in the Millennials but Young Folks may be having grown up in the tech bubble followed by 2008 just a little bit of a sense that like things come and go and just like this is a buying opportunity. We are farther from say the Great Depression were farther from like the significant downturns that lasted for decades.

4 (22m 12s):
And

1 (22m 12s):
we're closer and more familiar with these more v-shaped downturns that we've seen in the

4 (22m 17s):
past. We're getting a lot of questions in from Facebook and from YouTube and from Twitter. I'm let me go to a question from Gerald KES water. He says this 1200 dollar stimulus check is extra money. How best would I invest this? He says he has it now in a savings account through a local credit union. What do you recommend people do with his twelve hundred dollar stimulus check if they got it. I've been amazed at how many

1 (22m 38s):
people are getting that stimulus money and saving it we would expect in this. This time that when the government is pumping money into the economy through the stimulus the people go out and immediately spend it but I signed numbers I read numbers last week that the national savings rate has jumped from 9 percent. It jumped to 15 percent at the end of March. I might be even higher in April people are saving so much more and even this stimulus that's meant to help them pay the bills or get through the Month people are saving that and it's in part because there's nowhere to spend it and I wonder too if younger people Like especially living through this are going to be more focused on savings and think more about you know, putting that money away in our own customer base.

1 (23m 21s):
We saw about 55 percent of customers put it into a short-term savings vehicle like that Community Bank or our cash Reserve funds that we have a betterment. We're seeing another 40% put it into long-term retirement savings things like an IRA or a 401k and actually the smallest minority. Maybe it's maybe it's 15 percent is putting putting that money toward say an immediate spending need so pretty striking

4 (23m 51s):
John. I'm gonna ask you to put your entrepreneur hat on for a second you started this business you were you were a young Trader at Lehman Brothers when it collapsed or like right right around the time of the collapse and this is 2008. I mean you were out of work you started this business at a time when it was hard for you to get investors on board. There was money was tied. I mean if you are thinking about Starting a business or you were thinking about starting a business and then this crisis happened. What advice would you give to somebody I use who's you know in that

1 (24m 20s):
situation everyone was saying this is an awful time to start a financial services company don't even think about it. And I said this is when we're needed most people are losing their shirts and they need a financial advisor and banks are closing and no one trust the banks anymore. This is the time of the launch it it was a hard time to raise money. It was a hard time to get started but in retrospect, Our success is as much timing as it is anything else? Right? It was the right time to launch this business and we did enjoy a long bull market for many years thereafter. Now in this moment, I've heard this question 2 if you know, is this a good time to start a business you like? I've lost my job. I've been thinking about starting something. Maybe this is that moment when I should do it and my answer is yes.

1 (25m 3s):
My I would say a downturn is actually a great time to think about starting a business, especially because you might have more free time on your hands and you can finally focus on doing that thing that your Passionate about or solving that problem and there are so many problems right now to solve and so many novel ways of solving them what I think you know, everyone has their own interests and should focus on what makes them, you know, most excited and help in making the world a better place, but I always say I think there are three areas that are particularly ripe for disruption Financial Services Healthcare and education technology is going to change these three areas more in our lifetimes than any other things Financial Services. You get it Health Care.

1 (25m 44s):
Wow, like right now, there's so much telemedicine happening. Just we're able to use technology and we should be using technology in a much better way than we are to track patients such and there's so many opportunities that light is being shown upon them because of this crisis in education. My daughters are in the other room doing their morning meeting with their like kindergarten. You know, we're you never thought technology would be used in this way and they came to Garden class German. It's not all great, but there are parts of it that are really interesting and good. I think we'll build on those in the decade to

4 (26m 14s):
come. What about with your your team? I mean like how is it going to change the way you guys operate? I mean presumably, you know, people are going to start asking questions. Like hey John do I really need to live in New York City? It's really expensive. Can I live in Southern New Jersey and do this job or can I live in you know Western Pennsylvania? What wherever

1 (26m 31s):
we've been talking a lot about this and hearing a lot about it for my team. A lot of it depends upon where people are in life. I find, you know, we've got young folks who have weathered this Out in Manhattan the entire time and they just cannot wait to get back to the office and like get things back to the way they are. We've got parents who are holed up with children who say I've got to get out of here. I'm gonna bleep I need I need that off as I can't function it at home. I can think of dozens of team members who are now thinking about moving to the suburbs or I've already, you know, made made some steps in that direction or even to the Midwest or two.

1 (27m 12s):
Southeast people are definitely thinking that this is working for me and like there's things about this Arrangement that I like better and it will change the way we work I think because people are having forced into this. I used to think I could I couldn't possibly work from home as the CEO. I had to be there every day, you know, like it's all the essential and this is shown me that I was wrong and so it's interesting job before I let you go.

4 (27m 35s):
What is one thing that you want to take away from this crisis like that might change your mission or might just science how you think about the culture of your organization or your purpose is what in five years time if you could say, you know, this is how that crisis made us better and more resilient company. What would you want that to be

1 (27m 55s):
I think being remote is a big part of it. But where my mind goes immediately is something that my wife said yesterday, which was that it's so nice that in this time. You've been home for dinner with us every night and in our 10 12 years. Relationship like that's never been the case. You've never done that and I mean I realized that we were doing it and it's been really nice, but it didn't occur to me that I'd never done that before so consistently, and I hope I keep that, you know, if there's one thing I keep it it's going to be hard, you know, we're all going to go back, you know someday and things will be in some ways back to the way they were but just having dinner with the family has been pretty

4 (28m 36s):
special. I love that John Stein a betterment. Thank you so much. Stay safe, and hope to see you soon. Soon, you know once this is

1 (28m 43s):
over. Thanks guys. I hope to see you on the other side in person again and be well glad your family as well and

4 (28m 49s):
safe. That's an excerpt from my conversation with John Stein the founder of betterment to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR next week. We're going live every single day with five Founders in the fashion and Beauty World will be catching up with Marcia kill. Fortune - Sarah LaFleur Alli Webb and James Reinhardt, so bring your questions to join us live from May 18th through the 22nd at noon Eastern nine Pacific on Twitter YouTube and Facebook. And if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilient series or other virtual and PR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org.

4 (29m 32s):
This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and we'll see you on Monday. With a brand new episode of How I built this I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.