2 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience addition. These episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're thinking creatively during such a disruptive time. And today we're going to hear from Taha Bawa the co-founder of good wall. Good wall is a social network that connects high school and college graduates with jobs and scholarships today good wall has raised over 16 million dollars with more than a million users on the platform. I spoke with Taha from His company headquarters in Switzerland where he gave me a rundown of good walls mission for people who've never heard of good Walt up. Just kind of tell us how how does it work?

1 (39s):
It's essentially a mobile first platform that's designed for the Next Generation. We started off with high school students helping them build up their first profile showcase themselves in a way that accentuates their extracurricular activities in particular connect them to Opportunities, mostly scholarships and colleges and then all this happens within a positive and supportive community. Over time we've grown with our members into the college and young professionals face. Our whole goal is to level the playing field and maximize the potential of as many people as possible.

2 (1m 10s):
So it's been compared to LinkedIn. Is that a fair comparison? I think there are

1 (1m 15s):
similarities. However, we're really focused on on our part, which is this next Generation starting as early as 16 and guiding them through Almost sure putting them through the future of learning and learning and those opportunities. I think there are various features that we have that they don't and We're really focus from a user experience perspective and then from a community perspective. It's very different posts that you see on LinkedIn just don't work here. You wouldn't find students talking about being on the chess team being on the robotics team being on excetera Etc on good

2 (1m 45s):
wall. I mean if you are, let's say 18 years old and you're interested in applying to college. What does it look like you go to good wall you create up a profile for yourself. And and then what

1 (1m 56s):
yeah, you go into good while you create a profile for yourself our initial early adopters or SLI International School students who maybe didn't have as much guidance as others or students based out of the u.s. Who maybe didn't have as much guidance from their parents or from College counselors would come on here see what other people are doing. They would be matched with colleges and universities and also with scholarships based on their data and their profiles and then they'd be able to connect with like-minded youth. So, for example, you have this girl based out of Jordan who was really into Robotics and Science and unfortunately, there's no one really around her. Who had that those similar interest and she was able to find others like her in the u.s. Connected internet NASA did incredible things afterwards actually many of our students have gone and found exclusive opportunities that universities like Oxford and others that we partnered with and that's it super fulfilling from that perspective.

2 (2m 48s):
Yeah. It's really cause check it out last night and it's like little bit like if you didn't have a mentor or a guidance counselor, like here you go. Yeah. Definitely.

1 (2m 57s):
I think a lot of our early adopters were privileged. The sense that they have a lot of ambition and maybe they went to good schools. But over time we've especially of last year. We really put a lot of effort and a lot of energy towards helping youth who are maybe a little under privilege and that privilege is actually not necessarily a hundred percent link to financial situation, but it can be for example, we're doing now with UNICEF and other organizations in Africa for example is we're running programs there and we're really helping you bring out their ideas build up their confidence show who they are and connect to Opportunities and it's been really really Lying and we expect to do more underrepresented communities in the US, for example, we're doing more and more there. And that's where the biggest room for impact is at the end of the day.

1 (3m 38s):
We are a social Enterprise and it's very fulfilling to help youth who go to Elite schools and connect them to Elite universities and colleges, but it's even more fulfilling and even more important for us to step in where the say the impact Delta is the biggest for example youth in Africa who in certain African countries that just don't have any exposure don't have opportunity don't have that guidance, but do have access to a phone. And can as a result both good. So we're really trying to do more there in particular

2 (4m 4s):
and we started this company in 2014 with your brother. Where did the idea come from?

1 (4m 9s):
Yes. Oh my it was my brother's idea. Both of us were born in Switzerland. We lived in Pakistan Iran the US came back to Switzerland our parents used to work in the humanitarian sector. So my father worked for or served refugees from 30 years and we experienced a lot growing up. We was like quite a contradiction going skiing on the weekend in a very affluent or privilege little bubble in Switzerland. Where Whereas at the same time we'd go in summer vacation and and give candy out to Refugee kids who are our age 10 11 and that that really did Shake us quite a bit and throughout our upbringing we realize that we are where we are. I'm here not because I'm smart. But because I was lucky I was born I could have been born two doors down and that my life would have been very different and I'm confident because of the experiences I had rather than because I'm in 80 able to do so and that's really what pushed us to say.

1 (4m 57s):
You know, we were lucky in this sense what would happen if we were Bow to give those opportunities in terms of particularly experiences. So education is one thing or traditional education is one thing but particularly experiences to millions of Youth around the world what would happen? How could we change things and that's where we thought? Okay. It has to be mobile first story has to be a digital solution and it has to be able to tackle millions and we wanted to go a step further. We said it's good to maximize one's potential, but hopefully we can do that in a way and we're very idealistic in that sense in a way that it maximizes or improved society as well for impact Society positively. Which is our mission statement that if we have enough people that are exposed to not only improving themselves, but there's so often. It's a form of Education knowing what's out there if I hadn't gone to those refugee camps or if I didn't have the background where my parents are Richie from Sri Lanka would I really be so inclined to have this positive impact?

1 (5m 47s):
Who knows but I did have that chance and I view that as an opportunity. So if we can give those opportunities and showcase through volunteering through being aware through connecting to people from different backgrounds, you know, hopefully we can move the world forward. I think it's needed now more than Right. Yeah for sure

2 (6m 2s):
Tyler stuck beside business for a second. I think you've got around 50 employees around the world. You've got offices in obviously Switzerland the u.s. Germany Serbia the Philippines mean you're growing you've got presumably some cash Runway but these are tough Economic Times. I mean LinkedIn just laid off a thousand people there record numbers of people in the US filing for unemployment. So first of all, how is your Revenue been in your business been impacted by the global? Economic slowdown?

1 (6m 29s):
Yeah, I mean When it happens, I think the first week where we started noticing was getting really serious. I remember it. The first thing we did was we had a board meeting and we talked about. Okay, what's our cash situation and let's make sure we get through this however long that may be while maintaining the the team for two reasons one is like you don't want to be on that downward death spiral but also because we have, you know, the opportunity to have real impact in this time if we make the changes and adapt effectively, but we won't be able to do so if we don't have the team to do it so we've actually hired over the past few months. We've actually grown over the past few months and we've adapted to this over. The first week was really about scenario planning and getting through that after that. We assume the worst but we ourselves decided Well, there's definitely less demand for recruitment is definitely less hires which hurts us which hurts our users or our members and we said, okay, how can we how can we help because if they come on in there no jobs.

1 (7m 20s):
Well, it's a it's a very bad experience, but it's also it's hurting us. So what we did was we put up we put together this program better together and other challenges where youth can lead develop work. It's at the end of it. They get certificates that show that they've accomplished these different challenges participated in it. And at the end it can be used as work experience towards all of our partner companies. So it's actually giving them something to do some hope and at the same time this is generating revenue for us as one example of generating revenue for us. Another example is just before the crisis part of our model is we work with large partners and a couple of these large partnership. So like leading Recruitment and needing education groups stones, or came to a halt All and then I don't know if this is despite covid or because of covid other opportunities came about we've now partnered over the course of covid-19 Kit leaders in markets that we are not present in or were very marginally present in and is actually allowing us to take up extra market share and grow in a more significant way September onwards.

2 (8m 20s):
Yeah. Let me ask you about the demographic that you target right? I mean and I'm going to I'm going to use this term gen Z, which I always cringe when I say it because I remember like when I was In my 20s and people talked about Gen-X and their Slackers and I would just cringe and just hear older people talk about gen xers and I was like, what are you talking about? But just just to make this kind of simple will just say gen Z. So if your gen Z, I'm sorry. It's annoying. I know this is a really challenging economic moment. If you are in high school now and you're going into college or if you're in college, there's a pretty good chance. You're going to graduate into a world with very few jobs, you know a world that we haven't seen certainly since 2008.

2 (9m 5s):
9 and 10, but maybe far far more challenging than that. What's your sense? I mean, what do you think? I mean do you think that's that's actually true that that is likely to be the case for the next three four five years or more.

1 (9m 19s):
Yeah, I think whether or not we go through a deep recession with mass unemployment particularly for the Youth of next three four five years. It's very probable that use at least in the short run or to suffer their The last to be hired the first to be fired and that's Justified for various reasons including ethical though. They have less commitments and for example, someone with a few kids, but it is incredibly difficult and the mental toil of let's say an 18 year-old. It doesn't know what's coming up next we need to be able to be resilient and we need to be able to learn how to learn and adapt because we just don't know what's going to happen. So they could be a second downturn there could be a third downturn they could be sustained downturns and us like Across Society but in particular for the Youth if we have an opportunity, they have an opportunity to take this and say okay.

1 (10m 6s):
It doesn't kill me. It might make me stronger and I can learn from this and develop that resilience that five six ten years from now. I'm able to deal with the next Crisis in a more in a stronger way because I'm going to have to do that and some of the skills that need to be developed in my in my opinion are entrepreneurial thinking that ability to be flexible and resilient. We need to do more though Beyond just the the these massive stimulus packages. And the government is trying to do whatever they can for sure. This generation needs the government needs to intervene to be able to organizations need to be able to intervene to support them to the best of their abilities in terms of developing these skills and being able to be

2 (10m 43s):
resilient when we come back in just a moment. I'll talk with Taha about college graduates who will probably face a shrinking job market over the next few years stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition.

2 (11m 24s):
Despite the economic slowdown Taha and his company good wall have been able to grow their team and stay afloat. But as jobs are drying up across the globe many college graduates are looking for opportunities and can't find any if you're like in your early twenties now and you're looking for an opportunity and you can't find one. What would you recommend a young person do who's graduating college was just entering the workforce. Sin is kind of trying out different potential career paths. I mean, is it a good time to just steer clear of the workforce for a while and get some more education which in the u.s. Means more debt. What do you think?

2 (12m 4s):
Yeah, I

1 (12m 5s):
think definitely trying is important but this might just be an opportunity to start your own thing. You know, a lot of great companies came out of the last crisis because they just couldn't find jobs or that opportunity just wasn't there for a year. So maybe start one's own thing. It's never been easier to start a business. It's never been easier to try something new. So if it doesn't work, that's incredible work experience. You know, when we talk to see a Charro's of some of the leading companies in the world. What are they looking for or what were they looking for before the crisis and definitely after is that ability to be entrepreneurial even if you're working for a Fortune 500 so it can't hurt best case scenario you build something amazing. Worst case scenario you fail and you take those skills and you leverage those skills and you keep your mind active.

1 (12m 47s):
It's so important from a mental health perspective keep your mind active and then apply them. In the market comes back which it will at one point another opportunity if maybe starting yourself, isn't it? Join some friends or join or reach out to small startups definitely volunteer is an opportunity. There are a lot of ngos are a lot of nonprofits that need help or need support right now build up your work experience gained some experience like concrete tangible work experience that differentiates you further rather than just having eight 12 months in your resume with your empty. Unfortunately, it might not help on the financial side. And that's where that's where one has to decrease. Active and it's just really tough. And that's where what is it government intervention on that front need to be because there's some that just can't afford to do what I just said which is volunteer or build your own company because they don't have that safety net.

1 (13m 32s):
They don't have that opportunity in and unfortunately, they're we're almost out of ideas because okay you go back to college you just talked about extra debt, but for some unfortunate they're going to have to do it and that leads to a more, you know, a more philosophical discussion on why is there so much debt attached to a college education where you know in Switzerland, for example, I paid Undergraduate I paid around thousand dollars a year and some leading education. It's like a one of the top universities. And so that's that's another

2 (13m 60s):
discussion. Yeah, you know, I agree with you. I think that this is a moment to be entrepreneurial and it's challenging because you're right. I mean not everybody can do that from an employer's perspective. You mentioned human resource officers. And by the way, you're right. I mean the human resource officer is very attracted to an applicant who started a business or try to start up. And it failed, you know, it's because as you say that's incredible life and work experience, what are some of the characteristics and sort of ways that quote unquote gen Z works that might be different from previous generations. Maybe what their expectations for example? Yeah. It's something that comes up quite

1 (14m 39s):
often. The expectations are huge. I think even if we look at the generation before part of it is there needs to be in there always has been this need for grit for determination, I think. Post covid we're going to have very likely an incredibly resilient and determine Generation. I think it's it's really great for I mean, it's great. It's very tough a lot are going to suffer and I hope I hope you'll be as few as possible. But coming out of this generally on the whole there's good reason to believe that this generation is going to be really conscious a bit. Like after World War II really conscious of financials very conscious of how lucky they are how privileged how quickly things can change how precarious the society within which we live is is actually it's a disease that yes, it's serious, but it could have been a lot worse.

1 (15m 26s):
It could have been ten X Plus because you're a hundred excellence and it's brought our global economy to its knees and you know, we feel like we're all from the Masters of the Universe and that's not just gen Z but across demographics and we clearly aren't and I think a little bit of humility goes a long

2 (15m 39s):
way. I mean, I love the energy of younger people coming in because their ideas are just so radically different from the way people in my business have seen their profession. Is your advice for employers looking to harness the intellectual power of gen Z?

1 (15m 56s):
Yeah. I know. It's a really good question their basics of management that have been the same for every demographic and every every Niche within that demographic it's look at maximizing the potential of the particular individual, right so different people react differently to different forms of management, you know within this we can talk about Trends but the ability to give them that chance to express themselves. The need for trust is always been there now. Definitely so So I mean even more so because they know what they're capable of but then also must not forget they are still with very few years of experience and being able to be there to give feedback to tell them what they're doing right tell them what they're doing wrong. Both sides is critical. So just leaving someone out there in the wilderness is not going to necessarily lead to Great results either but giving that safe space giving that trust and creating an environment of being gamma here to maximize your potential and the order the direct order may have worked or they may have been able to get away with it and Ask but you know, there's some people that might still be okay with it, but generally speaking that's especially for youth with a lot of potential that's just not conducive for maximizing the potential.

2 (17m 1s):
Where do you see your your business and what you're doing in five years from now. What do you want it to look like? Yeah, I think for us

1 (17m 8s):
it's always been about really helping as many youth as possible be as inclusive as we can. And so we're ready serving youth in a hundred fifty countries would like to go deeper in certain areas through our Partnerships or a load. Sort of more youth in a more significant way provide more opportunities. Just read the best experience. That's probably what's most important. I think that's where we can have where we can make our contribution towards Society. That's what we're good at and now it's just about going to that next level. Yes. It's a challenging period but we're going to be okay we're going to get out of this and then it's about okay really taking this opportunity and doing the best we can because we are in a privileged situation if we were if we were unlucky which is the case for many other startups, you know, I've I've friends who had term sheets for massive rounds of financing to evaporate.

1 (17m 51s):
We hear the stories and then they just unlucky. So we're in this lucky position to be able to operate and to be able to do what we're doing. Let's make the most out of it. And I think that's our that's kind of our duty and I think that's

2 (18m 2s):
yeah about co-founder of good. Well, thank you so much for joining us. Thank you. That's an excerpt from my conversation with Taha Bawa co-founder of good wall to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or At youtube.com slash NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Tyra Lockhart Matt Adams, Ellie Prescott, Gianna cappadonna, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

2 (18m 44s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you back here in a few days. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR.