2 (1s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from Comcast business Comcast business knows there are times when the need to connect really matters to keep customers and employees in the know and to keep business moving Comcast business is prepared for Times Like These powered by the nation's largest gig Speed network to help give you the speed reliability and security your business needs tools to manage your business from any device anywhere and a team of experts. Bert's here for you 24/7 to learn more go to Comcast business.com Hey, it's guy here. But I think you probably knew that anyway, before we start the show.

2 (44s):
I wanted to let you know about a short Anonymous survey that you can take to let NPR know what shows and podcasts you're listening to if you want to help us out, you can go to npr.org podcast survey. That's one word podcast survey. It won't take up too much of your time and it will really help support your favorite shows. That's npr.org podcast survey. Okay on today's bonus episode, so. As some of you know, we've started this new series of online video conversations where every week I talked to a founder or an entrepreneur or just a wise person about how they are building resilience into their businesses right now and in case you miss these conversations when they happen live, we are posting an excerpt right here every Thursday in your podcast feed and you can see all of them on our Facebook page facebook.com slash how I built this just click on videos.

2 (1m 36s):
Anyway last week. I spoke with six chefs. It's about the impact of covid-19 on the food industry. And today we're bringing you my conversation with Jose Andres the founder of world Central Kitchen Jose as many of you know, is a michelin-starred chef known for his many restaurants around the country including mini bar in Washington DC and bizarre in La Jose is no stranger to giving back in 2010 after the earthquake in Haiti. He founded World Central Kitchen, which is a nonprofit that provides meals during times of crisis. Specifically natural disasters and in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic World Central Kitchen has been on the ground serving hundreds of thousands of meals daily to people all over the world.

2 (2m 21s):
I spoke with Jose at his home in Maryland where he's cooking with his family delivering meals and feeding the masses by borrowing some bigger kitchens like the kitchens at the stadium. Where the Washington Nationals play baseball in Washington DC. I've seen some videos of you outside the stadium and literally delivering food. How are you doing that are you how are you staying safe? When when you're doing that work?

1 (2m 45s):
Well, these are a lot of people ask me from the beginning why we do what we do. I mean quite frankly wasn't a kitchen is doing close to 200,000 meals a day today. We reach 3 million Meals by the end of today and this is the reality but we don't do it alone. We are organization that we proven. Over and over that we can go from a small organization to sometimes the main organization in a in an emergency in bombers. We were the first ones on the ground and we fed 14 Islands eighty thousand meals a day. We were the first ones 10 days before anybody else show up here obviously America is or on is where we belong and to be able to put the know-how of both Central Kitchen at the service of fellow Americans is the best A moment in that in the way of we wish we were out of business and we don't have to do it.

1 (3m 46s):
But we feel like if our nurses and doctors are putting their lives under families at risk taking care of filing this virus One hospital at the time one patient at a time the lease Cooks like me we can do is to put our know-how in providing relief sometimes to hospitals. Sometimes two elderly home sometimes to homeless sometimes to school. Streets low-income families because that's what we do share this like me and many chefs Across America right now with an only feed the feel like we do in the good times, but we are committed to feed the

2 (4m 21s):
many. Can you give us a sense of how World Central Kitchen works? Like, where's the food made? And how are you getting a distributed? And yeah, how does it work?

1 (4m 30s):
Well, is it going blank system where for obvious reasons many restaurants Across America are shut down. And what we do is very simple. We in other times we don't even have restaurants because after the hurricane many restaurants are shut down completely destroy and electricity. No gas chaos. This is a different type of emergency. We have every single restaurant every single Chef ready to join us. So sometimes we don't even need to call them because what they call us or on their own they start obviously we become a good influence because we've been Doing this or whether you for not even weeks we've been doing this for months.

1 (5m 14s):
We began in Yokohama feeling 6,000 many of them American people in The Princess cruise ship we help the Japanese government. Then we went California to help the governor Newsom to do the same in Oakland. We knew that this was about to happen. We call it from the beginning. This is going to be calm Health prices. Obviously, everybody's going to talk about the economic crisis, but above all all these may become a big humanitarian crisis not only in America, but around the world humanitarian crisis because lack a foot. So how we do it. We are trying to put restaurants to join. We have more than 500 restaurants Across America and we are adding new restaurants almost every day.

1 (5m 58s):
Well, what why we do it because who better than to feed Americans then the same shapes that do it in the good times is not like restaurants are going to be retiring from Able to contribute but the restaurants are part of the solution the leaders the chef's the owners of the restaurants are in their communities. They know their communities better than anybody we partner with local organizations that know the neighborhood's very well. So we may be fitting in the Bronx and Harlem public housing fellows that they need our presence because nobody else is there or all of the sudden many ngos are not receiving funding many ngos don't have anymore the same luxury.

1 (6m 39s):
Three of volunteers and systems that we took for granted are shutting down we forget that ngos are the third biggest employer in America. And when those ngos are not up and running the system breaks, we should be super thankful for the ngos because really they do an amazing public service. So what we're doing is covering the blind spots. We are in more than 100 cities as we speak in multiple States and what we do is what we Best we partner Partnerships achieves something very simple. I 360-degree response what we see here is how together we can show Congress and the White House What legislation what bills they have to pass to make sure that we're not wasting fought by Farmers not being able to sell it and throwing in the fields or the production.

1 (7m 35s):
When at the same time, we have many cities Across America where families are hungry where trying to bring smart Solutions where everybody

2 (7m 42s):
wins. So if you are a a chef you can essentially call up World Central Kitchen say look, I want to put my kitchen to work. We want to make food in our community for Frontline workers or for homeless shelters and you guys can provide the funding to pay for the food to be produced.

1 (7m 57s):
Obviously. We're going to be doing these with every single restaurant. I wish what we're doing is proving concept for Congress is no reason why in this moment for should be a Should be part of the solution if farmers are throwing food to the fields. Let's make sure that the USDA makes the right call by supporting not only the big farmers but the small farmers thousands of them Across America making sure that we buy their product making sure the disabled that product to reach food banks, but also reach ngos, like ours churches school districts and make sure that we open up.

1 (8m 39s):
The ways we can distribute that food to every single American to every single

2 (8m 43s):
family. I saw a video of you as I mentioned just outside the baseball stadium in Washington, DC. What are you producing? Like? What kind of food? Are you are you making is it are they are they sort of box lunches. Is it hot food? Yeah one of them waffle.

1 (8m 57s):
So we're doing like today Brooklyn. We do farmers markets where people can come and pick up enough vegetables for a week for a family or with Doing for items that people can take home sandwiches and car roads and vegetables, but that's what we do hot meals the people can take home put in the microwave and Ricky's in other places. We do hot meals like in Washington DC where we are cooking out of the Nationals baseball stadium. So we have catering companies that they are helping us produce huge amounts of food. We're going to be delivering 25,000 Mills in Baltimore with help of the city.

1 (9m 39s):
He and the mayor of out loud all of the above is not one solution in the old days. We will open all our kitchens but now because we have so many kitchens and we are able to partner with almost every single shaft that wants to help the solution is actually rather easy. We need to make sure that in this upcoming bill that should be the humanitarian Bill something. I'm calling America eats. Now that Congress put no only the money and the resources that the right mechanisms. Make sure that that money arrives to the places that is needed. Sometimes we approve money but then in the wrong places and the a that's enriched anybody when you talk about foot you talking about about water in emergencies the organs you have now is yesterday.

1 (10m 28s):
We cannot wait a month from now. We cannot wait six months from now people need for today. Let's make sure that we are able to achieve

2 (10m 34s):
that. You know, it's amazing to me that you I remember you telling your life story on how I built this and working in Puerto Rico and you were in the Spanish Navy cooking for the the Admiral and I mean you you became a world-famous chef and now you are probably better known as an activist and humanitarian activists. Like I mean, it's kind of crazy. I did you ever imagine that just you your life would kind of go in a completely kind of a just a totally different direction. Well, I mean,

1 (11m 4s):
I still see myself as I said cool look before this pandemic began. You know, I wanted to be one of the best chefs in the world now, I'm only trying to be recognized by my daughter's that I'm actually okay cook how things change all of this Alan. Now. My main objective is come is my three dogs and my wife that every meal I made it's great. And actually I'm highly unsuccessful because they are very pretty girl of Daddy and believe me. I'm like wolf forget Michelin stars and forget trying to be one of the best chefs ever. Is much more harder trying to convince my three daughters how good of a cook I am forget the name Chef anymore.

1 (11m 45s):
So this is humbling in many ways and I'm enjoying every single second. I'm spending with them in ways. Probably will Define our relationship for the years to come we're going through this together. But for me, I feel the feel is the reality in my Michelin star restaurant minibar. We fit 16 people every day only in a very expensive restaurant. A few hundred people every year can eat in the restaurant but our talent the talent that every single food person has is the opportunity is Our Moment to show that we are not only interested in feeding the field but we must be here to feed the many.

1 (12m 27s):
This is what I'm so proud of my profession every single man and woman. Are there some people doing it with us some people doing it on their own but what we're trying to do is that we are this big brother that tries to or show examples of how it should be done or use giving others the same kind of willingness to step up and take care of fellow Americans will be okay if you stay home no everybody or every restaurant should open or everyone should be doing it. It's very important that we all together we do together as a smart as we can well with actions because we had boots on the ground.

1 (13m 8s):
We don't talk we Or concepts but then we are able to be giving ideas to the USDA to the White House to Congress. Why is not is not increasing immediately why is naps is not put in every state. So people can be buying from local restaurants if they're hungry why is naps is not increase so they can buy fruits and vegetables so our Farmers, especially the small farmers don't go bankrupt In This Moment should be the moment the Rural America steps up and they become actually a wealthy rural. Kanoa Rural America that right now there are suffering like everybody else, but they have the key to keep feeding America. Let's make sure that we don't throw money at the problem.

1 (13m 48s):
But investing to Israel's let's put America working in the process of filling America and making sure that the humanitarian crisis will not be another problem that we have to

2 (13m 58s):
solve because they were getting a lot of questions on social media through Facebook and YouTube and Twitter. I'm this one is from Allison Biggs and she asks, how do you think the restaurant and food industry in general is going to be changed?

1 (14m 9s):
Hi Allison, thank you for your question. Listen, I will love to tell you have every answer what I can tell you is one thing planning is not good enough anymore in this DNA because if you plan to match chances are that things will not go as you plan. And then what do you do? That's why I'm telling everybody that they need to have the new frame. The new game is adaptation adapt yourself to every moment every hour every day every single stands because things are very fluid. Things are gonna be be changing by the hour. So how restaurants maybe right now we need to take care of the Health crisis is no way that we can keep running our hospitals the way they are running with no equipment to protect our our health workers.

1 (14m 53s):
We need to find that coronavirus and make sure that by staying home is under control. So no nurses and doctors and hospitals are not overwhelmed like we've seen in many countries around the world but restaurants as soon as we believe that The may use the governors are saying let's reopen all we have an opportunity to reinvent ourselves. I've been in North Manhattan again in the Bronx in Harlem in Queens in Corona the man and woman, they are suffering. They are the people that work in the rich my hand and they are not doing so well the same we can say covid many other cities Across America is the moment that we need to understand that.

1 (15m 39s):
We need to be taken care of those workers. I'm a chef but I'm a business guy. I want every employee to make sure that makes a living that is not only the minimum wage, but it's a living that empowers them to be part of the American dream. I hope that as of this we will all think deeper about how we can have an economy that does well, but that's well for everybody not like that's well for some at the Silence of others. This is what I'm learning as I'm going across differences. In America through this

2 (16m 10s):
pandemic a lot of questions about how people can help is from Sheila to Castro. She thanks you for everything you're doing she says she'd love to volunteer with World Central Kitchen, but I am hesitant due to exposure what are other ways we can help

1 (16m 24s):
this happen. I have a brother Works in New York. He was in the Spanish military. He became a cook and my brother even being an amazing strong guy. He had some asthma issues when he was young. Other and we know that respiratory sickness is a big problem. So I told him don't try to be a hero. It's okay to stay home. So people can do a lot of things from home. Sometimes retweeting a Goodwill Twitter video that you see or something that you think is positive sometimes with a finger and your social media. You can be as spreading good messaging good stories good news, and these may seem not like much but believe me.

1 (17m 9s):
When people keep the spreading the good news that brings all of us together. This is a very powerful way to do it. So if only your home and you are retweeting think highly of yourself because you are helping between Millions more doing the same spraying that message if you are staying home, actually you're doing what our leaders especially the health experts are telling us to remove a stay-at-home is going to be saving the lives of many including the doctors and nurses that they are putting their lives and their families at risk. So even a staying home may not look much to you but actually is great because you can be going out probably but you are deciding to be a team member and team member means that loving each other is to stay away from each other.

1 (17m 54s):
So it's many things that you can do. You can be taken care of with a phone call of another lie person making sure that person is taking care of its so many little things that people can do that if we put them all together in a back actually. It's a very Powerful gestures that with all of them together. We are making a difference every day

2 (18m 15s):
Turbo along those lines truly videos on Facebook asks, how can you sustain real Central Kitchen 3 million meals is incredible number. How do you keep it going? I mean, do you have enough funds to keep that going indefinitely

1 (18m 32s):
we ever looked at the bank account of what central kitchen before we went to Bahamas? Azure Puerto Rico or North Carolina or Florida how Indonesia and we based our response on the money we had in the bank we wouldn't do one meal yet. We always said let's go. Let's do it and hopefully Good Will and good people will come to support that's been the case. I think what Sandra kitchen has earned a lot of credibility over the years by showing up first and sometimes leaving the I'm providing a smart Solutions in very critical situations and more than ever.

1 (19m 15s):
I think people are relying on us because we began even when nobody recognized this was going to be a humanitarian crisis and we have a lot of individuals. Obviously we have big donors philanthropies playing a big role. But then the heart of all Central Kitchen is really the individuals that give us one two, three, four five dollars and with that we are able to do so Sustaining what we do around the world and especially in this moment how much longer can we go? But I don't know we had money we're going to keep doing it. We always tell people don't worry before you send us your money. We already spend it, but I believe we put that money at work. We do more with every dollar than anybody we make sure that we reach the places that are really neat again.

1 (20m 1s):
I'm not the guy I'm use the founder. I only want to be one more guy with the boots on the ground going City to City. Being there giving food to homeless or hospitals and in the process learning with boots on the ground what's happening? So when I speak to Congress when I speak to other leaders, I can speak now we Theory but with knowledge of what's going on and that's why we gain the trust of PDF because we show them in real time. Not even we want to show off but because people genuinely care and want to know that we are bringing. Hope one plate of food at a

2 (20m 38s):
time. Let's say this is a question from Magda Rodriguez hunt and Magda asks. What is it that drives your passion? Like what? Is there a story that explains why you chose to put so much of your energy and effort into this

1 (20m 53s):
work? I don't I don't think it's been used one thing I think has been a lot of things maybe when I open Jaleo on 7th Annie downtown Washington DC that my restaurant hi Leo is across the street from red brick building. It says the missing soldiers office. This was the building where Clara Barton herself at her cat Porter's car. Martin is such an amazing American Zero because single-handed she was able to create a network to provide relief to the soldiers wounded soldiers during the Civil War.

1 (21m 34s):
Thanks to her. The American Red Cross was created my mom and dad were nurses. Yeah, I spent a lot of time in the hospital because they had different shapes and the hospital was the place my brothers and I we we will exchange mother and father and I think fondly of this Hospital and watching how my mom and my dad and their friends were always working beyond their duty to bring comfort and relief to people that were sick and sometimes without family members die so that the small gestures they have very big input for me as a Coke very early on I learned that if I could put at the service of others, especially in emergencies to feed people is sometimes in my own community that is real hunger is obvious when I joined by Gregor in I'ii, the year arrive Washington DC but wherever being one of the best food fighters in the history of America, he told me the charity seems is always about the Redemption of the giver when charity should be of the liberation of the receiver science.

1 (22m 39s):
Then I join him and he was my my Obi-Wan Kenobi and I try to learn about applying that simple but powerful concept to make sure that we don't do it used to feel good. But we do it in a smart way to give an only hope but the path forward to many people. Why do I do it? Because I can receive so much of my life. I'm only as good as the people that invested time on me and knowledge every one of us. We are who we are to others sometimes we don't even recognize them enough, but we are the byproduct of a lot of people that made us who we are.

1 (23m 24s):
Will receive more than we can ever get back for me and said quote. I don't know any other way to get back but to get back food in moments of disrepair in emergencies why I do it because I know that if I was in the bad situation, somebody else will be doing it for me. The least I can do the least. My profession can do Kelly's to be there to bring relief and bring food in the most difficult moments Jose

2 (23m 52s):
for a lot of people in the United. This has been a very difficult period last few years the polarization the tree all the anger cruelty and there's a lot of anxiety out there. A lot of people watching are anxious. I'm anxious sometimes. Can you tell me if you're hopeful like if you think about I know the next five years the United States like what are your reasons for just being

1 (24m 16s):
hopeful. My reason to be in the hopeful are obvious near where my restaurant open the National Archives they are we had the documents of the creation of our nation and there are three beautiful words. We that people I do believe that we've reached a moment that seems that those people that don't think like you or your enemy and we all are going to have to ask ourselves who are those forces I would say Negative forces that the are creating that environment forces that somehow they don't believe in respect forces that somehow think that whatever is good for them must not be good for others and I don't believe that what America stands for and I know because I've been in every single Corner in America in the last years in many emergencies and there I don't see Republic and there I don't see Democrats there are I only see Americans we the people coming together.

1 (25m 18s):
And joining forces to provide Comfort relief 1/8 to fellow Americans I think is the moment that we need to stand up to the meaning of we the people and our American fact a flag that I never thought of the stars as the states but me early on when I was young. I thought that the Stars symbolize the beautiful sky and night with all these stars were everything in America was possible and that you could As big as you want it, I felt very stupid when I realize was is stars for this States when I felt was stars for everything is possible so we could people willing to make it happen and we're going to do it by only changing changing in the understanding that even those that don't think like God should be our destiny to try to convince them that may be other ways, but also to listening to others that have a different point of view.

1 (26m 17s):
Of ours because maybe is certain things that they are right to we need to start embracing those that don't think like class if it's done with respect and if you feel they are also listening back at you because then we will reach this perfect beautiful middle point where we all respect each other. We are all able to leave with the thoughts of others and where we see them as people will enrich who we are and our point of view. So we the people the American flag a flag that symbolizes every one of us will be this kind of new beginning new moment where we are going to be weaponizing empathy that it will be no more time for people that want to divide us.

1 (27m 5s):
It will be no more time for people that will not respect others will be the moment that we will respect each other and where the new American dream and the new drain for the wall in be I will fight hard for me for my family. Family, and for the people I know but the new American Dream will be to also work as hard to provide for the people. You don't know to provide this saying you're dreaming for yourself for others. That's what should be happening in the next few years and I do believe America and the world will show that humanity is a beautiful place and that together with the people. We can't make that up.

2 (27m 39s):
All right, we're going to listen Jose and weaponize empathy Jose Andres, you're so inspiring is such a kind person. Thank you for what you do for everybody and for inspiring all of us to be better and and let's weaponize

1 (27m 52s):
empathy. Well, thank you. Thank you to you for bringing me to you Sean.

2 (27m 56s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Jose Andres the founder of world Central Kitchen to see our full interview or any of our other video interviews. You can go to facebook.com how I built this or the NPR YouTube channel will be putting these episodes in your feed every Thursday and hosting the conversations in real time every week at noon Eastern nine Pacific. Avec on Twitter YouTube and Facebook. And if you want to find out more about these conversations or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org and just a reminder. You can help out NPR by taking a short survey about what podcasts you're listening to at npr.org podcast survey.

2 (28m 37s):
It takes less than 10 minutes and it helps support the shows you love that's npr.org / podcast survey. Thanks for listening stay safe, and we will see you right. Here next week. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR.