0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Intuit, QuickBooks, dedicated to helping small businesses be more successful for those working to achieve their own definition of success. QuickBooks smart suite of business tools is designed to help them get there. Learn more@quickbooks.com. Hey, it's guy here. You know, a lot of people have been asking if we're going to be holding a, how I built this summit this year, and today I am very excited to tell you that the answer to that question is yes, and it's going to be super easy to attend this time because this year it's completely virtual from May 24th to the 27th. We'll be bringing you four days of inspiration conversations with iconic entrepreneurs and change makers, plus immersive networking sessions designed to help you build and grow your community of support.

0 (50s):
And of course your business, you can learn more about the summit and get tickets@summitdotnpr.org. And I cannot wait to see you there. Thank you to go daddy, the presenting sponsor of this year summit and to our supporting sponsor Dell technologies. Hey everyone. And welcome to how I built this resilience edition from NPR I'm guy Raz each week on Thursday, we invite entrepreneurs and other business leaders to come onto the show to talk about how they've been building resilience into their businesses this past year. And you can join us each Thursday at 9:00 AM, Pacific 12 Eastern on the, how I built this Facebook, Twitter or YouTube pages to hear the conversation and ask questions as well.

0 (1m 39s):
And today my conversation with Lisa Baird commissioner of the national women's soccer league, the NWSL was founded in 2012 and today it's got 10 teams across the United States. Lisa Baird stepped in as commissioner of the league on March 10th, 2020, and just two days into her job. The entire multi-billion dollar sports industry went dark. And Lisa had to make the tough decision to also shut down the soccer league.

1 (2m 11s):
You know, it was, it was, it was probably the hardest thing I ever had to do. And yet, you know, when sometimes you're confronted with a decision and you know exactly what to do, even though it's incredibly hard. Yeah, that was the moment I had started my job. And I went out to Chicago where our offices were and it was on Tuesday. And I remember I had come from public radio and journalism. And so we would following it as a story. And I'd gotten a text that day from a reporter at the New York times that I know and saying, Hey, what are you going to do about COVID? And I was on my first day of work. I was determining things. I would literally flew back to New York the next day, cause I had to attend a meeting.

1 (2m 55s):
And when I landed, my phone blew up and it, because the NBA had suspended their operations. And what was amazing to me is the sports industry worldwide shut down in 24 hours, an entire industry just hit the pause button. And I was literally got up on Thursday and I two days into it. I understood what the ramifications would be for our owners, for our players, for fans, for everybody who is in our smaller ecosystem. But there was, there was no hesitancy. I just shut down and it was then a matter of actually really pulling together what we were going to do next.

1 (3m 41s):
That was the thing that I was looking at going, okay, I understand we have to suspend, but wait a minute, this is beginning to just the sobering reality of how critical it was going to be for the sports industry. And then just started to set in like literally Thursday.

0 (3m 60s):
Wow. I mean, it's that moment right? Where I remember, because a week before I was in Arizona with my family for spring training, we sucked a Cubs game. We saw an Oakland A's game. It was incredible. It was just a regular amazing spring training baseball. Then all of a sudden, as you say, this multi-billion dollar industry, the sports industry in the U S alone shuts down, you know, spring training. And then of course the NBA, and then, you know, the other leagues begin to follow. And it's interesting, you said it was like a moment of clarity. It was like, you didn't even have to kind of go through a decision tree. You knew exactly what you had to do and, and that those kinds of moments don't happen very often in our lives.

0 (4m 45s):
But it, it sounds like you just, it was like, it was crystal clear,

1 (4m 50s):
Crystal clear. And I think it was because, you know, we realize we, we understand, you know, you have live sports and even at women's soccer, like we are a team sport or a contact sport, literally we're putting our athletes at risk until we understood what this was and what it was. So that's the moment of clarity was that moment of safeguarding health and wellness. But I think what was absolutely sobering was the few, the next few weeks out of it, the dawning realization that there was no game plan to come back. Like whenever, you know, there has to be a game plan about this, right? I kept, I called everybody, you know, I'm a small league, we're very thinly resourced.

1 (5m 31s):
So I'm calling the NBA, I'm calling people in the Olympics, I'm calling everybody. I can figure out to say, okay, what's the playbook. And there was none.

0 (5m 40s):
You gave an interview, actually NPR a while back. And you said there was no rule book. There was no playbook. And I had to make my own,

1 (5m 49s):
That's what you do. You start to take it apart and say, okay, what are all the problems that we need to start to solve? Well, the one was, of course we convened a medical task force of 15 doctors, by the way, you know, these are all doctors that, you know, are not subject matter experts in infectious disease, although they, you know, have access to the resources. So we just got to work to really try and understand what we needed to do to develop what then became medical protocols that governed every aspect of what we were doing. So that was one work stream. The second work stream for us was, you know, be even before we got to competition, one of my biggest concerns is we're a small league.

1 (6m 34s):
We're very tiny, we're dependent on things like ticket revenue and sponsorship. And we needed to put together a short-term and a long-term plan to have the resources that we needed to continue to pay our players. Then there was okay, once we can get people back to training safely, which took us weeks to develop the protocol and get that done, what kind of competition are we going to do? What does that look like? And on and on, you know, so it was, it was solving for everything. And I think what I did is I created all of these different groups that were working on it, but I was in on every group because we're such, we have, we had 17 people working at the league and we had great staff at our teams that are owners, but we just started to solve the problems, knowing that work or decisions in one group would affect

0 (7m 26s):
The other, one of the decisions that was made early on was that that the players would still be paid. The athletes would still be paid, even if they opted out from playing, which, which you eventually relaunched the season, but the idea of continuing to play, to pay the players. How, how was that made possible? If there was no ticket revenue, if there was no ad revenue, if there was no nothing,

1 (7m 50s):
You know, it was, this is the point of clarity and principle. And for me as a new commissioner, but also with our owners and importantly with our owners, you know, we knew that that was a critical component of whatever we were going to do is how we were going to safeguard our players, not only with the safety protocols, but also with the resources and there wasn't ticket revenue. There wasn't there wasn't the ordinary sources. So I started looking around again, no playbook. And we started to hear in late March about something that the federal government was going to do with the small business administration to offer a lifeline, which it was for us to small businesses who didn't have any resources coming in.

1 (8m 32s):
And I started to research it. And literally there was nothing out there about it on the internet. You were just kind of hearing things from different people. You know, I called our partner, JP Morgan. That's where we, we do our banking business. They didn't know anything about it. So I started to find out about it. I reached out, found the person at JP Morgan who could help me understand it. Literally remember this on Monday, the small business administration. And Steve mentioned this treasury secretary said, we're going to do this by Thursday and Friday, there was an app that was completely untested in order to load your paperwork in, to apply for this load.

1 (9m 12s):
I was so nervous guy. I literally was doing this because my director of finance had gone on maternity leave. She and her wife were having twins. So she was gone and the app came up on Saturday morning and I spent Sunday morning, I spent six hours on Sunday morning. We loaded in a thousand pages of corroborating documents to say, here's how we're going to pay our players. And here's all this stuff that we need. What I later learned is that some people just loaded in one Excel spreadsheet and got their loan. But I was so worried that I wouldn't be able to get this loan to pay the players. And seven days later, we got the resources that we needed to kind of buy us the time to continue to pay the players.

1 (9m 54s):
So it was a, it was a pretty, pretty helpful instrument. Thank you to the small business administration for doing that.

0 (9m 60s):
The PPP loans really did was a lifeline for so many businesses. I know that, that you started to talk about how can we bring this back? Obviously, the NBA got a lot of attention. They were in Orlando and there was a bubble. And you began to think about how do we do this with women's soccer? And eventually you brought it back. You kind of created this bubble in a world and you, and you, you relaunched in Utah, the, the challenge cup tournament. Tell me about bringing women's soccer back. How did you guys begin to construct that?

1 (10m 35s):
So you get your medical protocols and your doctor's talking, you start to think about resources and what you can do. And we work on a fraction of the resources as other leagues. So we started to think about ways to stage competition and frankly guy, we iterated through several rounds of, could we continue to do, you know, kind of the home in a way format that people wanted to do? I think, you know, we all wanted to think that fans would come back and there was this dawning realization that we weren't going to be able to keep our players safe unless we went to a bubble. So we started to look at that, that required us to identify a host city with the capabilities and the facilities that would enable us to do it.

1 (11m 15s):
We looked in Utah at that point in time, when we started to look at Utah, there were very little incidents out in the West of the United States. It was so there was low thresholds. I worked with the governor and the people at, at real salt Lake that helped us put together facilities. And we were actually able to put together a very contained plan. So we had all of the training pitches. We had two competition fields. We had access to enough locker rooms because the, the important thing about a bubble is keeping the teams would they're called pods, keeping separate. So we actually had to coordinate and develop the schedules.

1 (11m 58s):
So that one team was being fed in one hotel. They were able to go through the line from six 15 to, you know, six 58. And then we cleared, we sanitized and then we brought the second team. So it was all very coordinated. And it sounds easy now when I'm talking about it, but at the time none of this was tested. Yeah.

0 (12m 22s):
I mean, I mean on all 10 teams participated. So

1 (12m 26s):
Team early, before we started our bubble, one team Orlando called me on Monday night and their doctors called and said, look, we've had an incident of a positive test. And remember, this was like very early on. So people were still understanding how to test people. What the cadence was. Do you do one or two in a confirming test? There were things that we didn't know at the time, like what's a false positive, right? What? We didn't know that. So the whole industry was learning what was going on here and out of an abundance of caution, we said, and they said, look, we're going to withdraw from the tournament. There were other leagues that didn't do that.

1 (13m 7s):
We were so concerned about keeping the bubble pristine that they actually took the courageous action to withdraw themselves. So we went in with nine teams and we were there for a month. We staged a full-blown single, you know, it was kind of single elimination, knockout round. The most intense competition you can do in soccer is what we did. And we emerged with zero,

0 (13m 33s):
Not a single positive. It's incredible. I mean, you, and, and how many, I mean, how many human beings were involved in this bubble? I mean, I'm thinking what at least what 20 athletes per team. Yeah.

1 (13m 47s):
Rosters up to 28, but then you have all the staff, you have coaches, you have supporting, you have facilities. So there were probably over 550 people getting tested every two to three days. You know, when we had something that happened, we were obviously doing backup testing. And so it was, you know, finding a testing provider that could handle the volume and the turnaround time, because the, the whole key with testing is you want it late enough where you're ensuring that you have the most recent results, but you need it early enough. So that teams can make the roster decisions. They can be appropriately preparing. So even like a, a 45 minute shift, and when those testing results are coming back can influence something that's going to happen.

1 (14m 33s):
So it was, it was down to a level of like precision that, and no one had ever done it.

0 (14m 38s):
Yeah. And how did you, I mean, it's, it requires incredible discipline among the athletes and the staff and I mean, one person going out or breaking the rules. I mean, how, how you guys ensure that everybody cooperated well, you know,

1 (14m 57s):
I think two of the things I did was early on, I put together a zoom call, you know, with all my athletes. And so we did it twice. One was so that we could answer their questions about the medical protocols and they had very detailed questions. Like, what about this? How does this, how do you know this is going to work? So I sat there with over 230 players on zoom calls twice. The second time was, as we were going into the tournament, I wanted them to hear from me that Orlando had withdrawn and why I wanted to reassure him that we could do it. But in actuality, we had a partnership upfront with RPA that said, listen, this is the conduct that we are expecting you to do.

1 (15m 36s):
You must stay with your team. You can't mix with other teams. You can't go out. If you're going to have something delivered, it has to be according to this protocol of delivery, contactless, et cetera. And you know, it wasn't me that delivered the COVID free environment. It was the players and their discipline and their care for their own health. And one of the things I was really proud of is that early on, as a women's sports league, I realized what it's like to spend a month away from your family. And several of our, of our players are moms and have very young children. So we created a separate protocol just for the kids themselves. And those players were sequestered from their teams and their kids and their caregivers became part of the pod.

1 (16m 19s):
So it was, it was very challenging. That's why we called it by the way guy. That is why we called it the challenge cup.

0 (16m 25s):
It's amazing. I mean, that is just incredible. When we come back in just a moment, more of my conversation with Lisa Baird and how despite playing in front of empty stadiums, the league's television audience skyrocketed stay with us. I'm guy Ross, and you're listening to how I built this resilience edition from NPR Support for NPR and the following message come from block advisers, part of H and R block VP and general manager, Yon, Hardman shares how his team approaches, helping their clients

3 (16m 59s):
When helping small businesses, we really want to help them succeed by taking on their financial tasks. And we problem solve for those small business clients in the area of taxes, payroll bookkeeping, giving them the time back to focus on what they're best at to learn.

0 (17m 15s):
You know, block advisers can help your small business year round go to block advisors.com. Welcome back to how I built this resilience edition. When the national women's soccer league started their one month single elimination tournament. Last summer commissioner Lisa Baird realized they'd be the first professional league back. And despite making no money from ticket sales and playing to empty arenas, the league saw TV ratings increased by 500%. We had incredible

1 (17m 50s):
Response. And I think part of it was when we designed the competition, we were fairly far along in our planning and the Olympics had been canceled. I sat down with our partners. We have CBS as a partner and we have Twitch as a partner in Twitch, had our international rights. So we sat down with them and we said, listen, I know from my Olympic experience, how exciting this single elimination knock out round is to the public. It is, it is exciting because there's something on the line every game, but it is intense competition for the athletes and the coaches. And we were going into this with much, much shortened abbreviated pre-season training, but we all did it together.

1 (18m 30s):
And the response from the fans was amazing on TV. You know, think about it. It was a year and a summer when we were all consumed with the political news and, and the social activism news, everything was going on. There was a tremendous amount of uptick and news, and we weren't expecting to see the amount of intention with sports. I mean, we were going in going, this is what people are listening to, but when we got in there and the fact is by the time we had done all our protocols, all our planning, all our resources, we signed three national sponsors when we were ready to announce it. I think it was like April 24th or April 25th, maybe 27th. We were ready to announce it.

1 (19m 11s):
We were announcing on with our broadcast partner to CBS, literally dawned on me that we were going to be the first league back. Wow. Like here was the little national women's soccer league and we were leading all teams to return to competition. And it wasn't intentional. It was just the fact that we were maybe solving a smaller delegation, a smaller footprint, et cetera. But once we knew that we wanted to use that attention to really introduce America and the world to what I think of is the best women's professional soccer league with some of the best soccer that you could watch.

0 (19m 51s):
Amazing. I mean, you know, we were talking off camera before this started about 1999. That was a turning point for women's soccer in the United States that year in women's world cup. And of course us national women's soccer is a huge sport with huge, huge stars like Alex Morgan and so many others. In a sense, do you think that what happened this summer with the national women's soccer league and nine-year-old league was a tipping point, the beginning of a real now real national interest in this league that could actually turn it into something much, much, much bigger.

1 (20m 30s):
I do. I'm saying this like with confidence, everything, but when we were putting together a plan for the summer, there was part of me that said, look, I've gotta be a safe and risk-free as I can. And then there was the other part of me that said, I've got to take risks because this is a summer, and this is an opportunity to introduce our league or sport our players to a much broader audience. So it was that. And I have to tell you, there were a lot of sleepless nights, you know, I know the name of this series is resilience. I had a lot of sleepless nights over this because it was that combination of being incredibly conservative, but also taking risks. So at this point in time, where now we've announced our second challenge cup, we're going into a year where the best women's soccer players, both from the U S national women's team.

1 (21m 19s):
And also other of the best players in the world, Marta to BGR Rachel daily, people from all over the world will be altering between going back and forth between playing in our league and also playing in the Olympics and Tokyo this summer. And it's an opportunity for us to do something and put women's professional soccer on the same level, playing field as other premier sports. I mean, that's what I hope to accomplish.

0 (21m 47s):
Lisa, you're also running a business and it has to be sustainable. And, and of course at the beginning of the pandemic, you were, you know, you were applying for loans and, and concerned about, about whether you could sustain the league, given the, the, the boost and ratings. Was there a, a financial impact that in a sense made up for the financial losses, or was it still from a financial perspective, a tough year.

1 (22m 11s):
It was a tough year because ticket revenue and, and that's a big part of any sports, but particularly ours resources. But what I think we did, and we proved it is that the ratings we have are on the order of, you know, kind of not, not every, not every men's sports league, but we delivered. And we delivered really strong ratings for advertisers. And we were able to sign Procter and gamble, Verizon and Google as first time national sponsors. And we want to be greeted by the audience we deliver by the engagement of our fans, just like ever sports. So I think people are going to take a hard look at us this year and look at it and say, you know what?

1 (22m 53s):
Women's soccer is delivering what I need to, and that's going to give us the resources that we need to grow and kind of fulfill that destiny started in 1999 with women's soccer is like, we want to really be that independent self-sustaining sports league. And remember, we were not affiliated with any other men's sports league. We stand alone right

0 (23m 17s):
By ourselves. Right. We're getting some questions from viewers. This is a super insider question, but I think this is an interesting one from Danielle Lorens, Danielle asks, do you expect players that have gone abroad Rose <inaudible> Dell Kemper to come back and play in the NWSL?

1 (23m 34s):
Well, let me say if Rose or Kristin or Tobin are listening right now, you are absolutely welcome back. Anytime you want. The fact is that our sport operates within a global economy. We're not, you know, just like the national football league or even the NBA where most of the players are playing in one country. Soccer is a global sport, unlike no other. So every year there is some back and forth it's done via an organized process, frankly, of transfer fees, et cetera. This year because of our abbreviated season, I know that several players did choose to go abroad and play abroad because they wanted more playing time.

1 (24m 16s):
These are professional athletes, and this is their career. So Alex Morgan for instance, went and played, I think for Tottenham this summer or in the fall, we were only offering abbreviated system, but she came back and she,

4 (24m 28s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, the Motley fool, who wants to help you find great stocks. That's why they've created a report and a group of five stock picks for the next generation of investors. And it's free for all NPR listeners visit fool.com/npr.