1 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show the how I built this book is now a New York Times and Wall Street Journal bestseller. So thank you to all of you who ordered it and for your support of this show. If you haven't picked it up and you want to learn the secrets of how to develop an entrepreneurial mindset how I built this the book is for you. It's now available wherever books are sold and in most countries around the world or by visiting how I built this.com or Or guy Roz.com and

3 (32s):
thanks.

1 (36s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes as many of you know, we talk with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're thinking creatively during this very disruptive time. And today we're going to hear from Justin gold. He's the founder of Justin's which makes peanut and almond butters protein bars and other nut snacks and ever since the pandemic started. Justin has noticed a few changes in the way people shop for their comfort boot, but He told me a bit about how we got to start. So I'm a vegetarian and

2 (1m 11s):
17 years ago. I started making peanut butter and almond butter in my kitchen with a food processor mainly because I sound like a fossil but Back Then There are two types of peanut butter, right it was smooth and crunchy and that was really it there were a few brands of almond butter. None of them tasted really good. You know, when you eat a handful of almonds, it tasted amazing. So curiosity led me down a path of experimenting and then with a food processor. I was making all these Concoctions putting them in jars literally putting them in the fridge and in the cupboards my roommate started eating them all started writing Justin's on the jars right to kind of protect it and and at that point someone said, hey, this is a really great product you ever thought about turning it into a business.

2 (1m 51s):
I didn't know anything about business, but I didn't know how to do is use a library. So I used see use business school's library. I didn't go to college, Colorado, Colorado

1 (2m 0s):
University never see ya in Boulder

2 (2m 3s):
and they go to school here, but I knew I felt Using their library and I wrote a business plan and I got a lot of help from local mentors and advisors and people in the community launched at the farmers market and when I launched it was just with the jars and I got him into a few local stores and I was really struggling and what got us kind of noticed. I guess you could say was getting outside the jar and getting into a squeeze pack and the squeeze pack was really our single point of differentiation and it allowed consumers not only to travel with With portable plant-based protein but also have his trial size to try something new like an almond butter because almond butter was you know over ten dollars a jar and that's a big ring for someone to try something new but for a squeeze pack alleviated that pain brought them into the franchise then we also do chocolates and it's not because it was a really smart deliberate business decision is because I love peanut butter cups and no one was making who doesn't want.

2 (3m 0s):
Those are those are the

1 (3m 1s):
things I pick out of my kids Halloween bags peanut butter cups. Just going back on the squeeze packs for those who don't know what they are. I mean, it's pretty self-explanatory little sort of squeezy packs of peanut butter kind of like those energy packs. I use those when I run they're great. And so that was really the differentiator. It wasn't the jars of peanut has it they look different but that wasn't what got the attention. It was a little squeeze packs.

2 (3m 26s):
It was I thought the dress would be enough because we had a honey and we had cinnamon and Maple and just the flavor differentiation, but it's still really wasn't enough to stand out on shelves in what happened was the squeeze pack not only did it create a whole new sub category of products, but also made this portable protein kind of nut butter a reality and it all came because I'm a big biker and I wanted protein. I didn't need more sugar or carbohydrates and what was really fun is when we first launched the product people didn't know what to do with it, right? They were like, well do I put it on a sandwich with with jelly and then heat it together. I'm No, no, no put it on an apple banana eating right out of the pack.

2 (4m 8s):
And then I'm like, oh really? And then what happened is when other companies started to create their own squeeze fax, it really validated as a category. It's been really special that what it's really done is been a trial vehicle for our jars. Yeah, and that's really helped grow the jars in during the pandemic the jar business has been the strongest part of our business because it is that household plant-based protein that is is a staple

1 (4m 35s):
I read An interview gave or you describe the first kind of three years. I think one of the things you did in this is really cool for anybody who's starting a business now that in the early days you would go to Whole Foods and you would look at all of the glass jars at Whole Foods to find out what brands were being made in glass jars and where they were manufactured or packed and you contacted a glass jar co-packer in the area and beg them to have some time on their line and I guess you got like over nights and weekends and you basically I spent three years just packing your own nut butter into glass jars and that was not sustainable. Right it was not profitable is not sustainable. It was just a grind.

1 (5m 16s):
How did you keep going? What made it what made you not just give

2 (5m 20s):
up a I had a goal. I knew what numbers I needed to achieve and I had a plan on what retailers and needed to roll out to to achieve those numbers and it was the optimism that I had from the local community Boulders a great Community is support local they support natural organic. They support the on - art and I also realized that I'm not really a skilled operator. My my passion and skill is outside of the manufacturing. But I knew that I had to hit certain volumes in order to get to a manufacturing facility where then I can focus on other things sales marketing and growing the brand and so I really worked really hard knowing that there was a light at the end of the

1 (5m 58s):
tunnel in March when it became clear that pandemic was going to be a serious thing people rushed to the stores to buy. Toilet paper and energy bars and I'm assuming nut Butters to I'm assuming that you probably saw a spike in sales. Is that right? By the way,

2 (6m 14s):
we did we did not across the board but across some parts of our business.

1 (6m 18s):
Yes, then were you bracing for a decline in Revenue. I know the that Justin's nut Butters were purchased by Hormel in 2016. So you have got a parent company, but you're still operate independently and you still work there. Were you guys kind of bracing for four? A decline in

2 (6m 36s):
Revenue. So the first thing we had to do was make sure that everyone in our organization felt safe supported and that they had food in that everyone knew that we work on it just to shut down our business. So I think giving people the sense of security gave them the optimism to continue to do their jobs. They knew they were taking care of and we didn't know what to brace for it to be completely honest. We started to reach out to our retailers to see what they needed and and they told us exactly what they needed was more proud. Everything flowed Downstream. So then we reached out to our contract manufacturers to make sure that we save you know in Supply and we actually had to make sure that they were taking care of their people is like having for holidays back-to-back-to-back this

1 (7m 18s):
unprecedented demand.

2 (7m 20s):
And so the first thing we had to do was kind of cut back on the skews that weren't our top sellers and then our manufacturers went to seven days a week and it's monitoring their progress and monitoring stores and allocating dis stores based on their demand and needs and then pulling resources away from food service and putting them more towards grocery the you know, it's it was wild and it continues to be wild

1 (7m 43s):
and what kind of Trends are you are you noticing or saying in terms of sales and consumption. I mean our people sort of back to consuming Justin's nut Butters and the same way, you know, because people aren't making school lunches for kids as much but people have more time for example to exercise and also they're eating at home. So are you noticing any Trends that you hadn't seen before. Yeah,

2 (8m 9s):
and it's fascinating because one of my roles is innovation within our organization. So trying to guess in to understand the things that I need in my daily life the transfer noticing our people aren't shopping the stores as much right now. Right right you're in and you're out. So a lot of the impulse purchases have been flat if not declining. So some of our chocolate items that were single serve are doing nearly as well as the chocolate items that are multi backs same goes. It's our jars are doing really well because it's something you can take home or squeeze packs aren't doing as well as two jars because it's more of an on-the-go activity and I feel like people aren't as on the go as they are right now their home and they can take a spoonful almond butter or peanut butter rather than have a squeeze pack or something.

2 (8m 53s):
So we've noticed that a lot of the trends are at home. We've also positioned ourselves well with a lot of retailers by being a part of their their online kind of shopping programs consumers aren't Going to stores as often and so the brands that have leveraged themselves with the online platforms the instacart whatnot are seeing success with that as well. And that was something that caught me by surprise, but now I get it right it that's part of the future

1 (9m 21s):
when we come back in just a moment more of my conversation with Justin gold and advice for future entrepreneurs who may be wondering is now the right time to take a leap stay with us. I'm Gyros and you're listening to how I built this resiliency. chicken from NPR this message comes from NPR sponsor we transfer and it set of tools for transforming doubts into ideas. Collect is a mobile app that helps you save organize and share inspiration paper is a digital notebook that captures. Your thinking paste is a presentation tool to make it easier to present your ideas.

1 (10m 3s):
And we transfer is a modern simple file transfer tool the next time you doubt something let we transfer settings. Tools help move your ideas forward learn more at tools to move ideas.com and one more thing the New York Times best-selling book how I built. This is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with tons of stories. You haven't heard about how some of the greatest entrepreneurs you You know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books.

1 (10m 54s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition and I'm talking with Justin gold. He's the founder of Justin's which makes nut Butters and snacks just in printer entrepreneurs had for moment. I mean you started this business in 2004 when you were in college, I think he was studying to be a lawyer right now a lot of people out of work, but there's also some indication that many people are considering starting their own businesses. I think the number of applications for employee identification numbers. Has increased by half a million this year compared to this time last year and that's the first step in starting a business. As you know, do you think that it's a good time to do that? I mean, do you think that despite the challenges that there are opportunities at this moment?

2 (11m 41s):
It depends right? You mean there's two things are the most important to me. Number one. Is there an unmet consumer need and number two, are you passionate about it? So if there's a problem that you've identified that your Passionate about fixing the absolutely now's a great time to start a business. Hopefully there's enough people that share that pain point that you can turn that into a business. But if you're bored you're looking for something to do and you're not sure that can be tricky. But again, you know, if you don't start somewhere you'll never end up anywhere. So I never turn entrepreneurs away with a bad idea. I was talk to them and say look, I don't know if this is a good idea or not. But if you're passionate about it, you think it's meeting and I met consumer need Then launch it see what happens and guess what will probably happen is if it fails you'll learn from that failure and pivot it to hopefully find your success and if you are lucky and you get it, you know, right the first time.

2 (12m 37s):
Wow,

1 (12m 39s):
I mean when you started selling that Butters you weren't making a whole lot of money and I don't think you were profitable. But but how did you know that it was going to work that you should continue? Is it just people saying this is awesome. This is so good. Was that basically it?

2 (12m 53s):
You never know right? I mean you never know and I think it's the Law of Attraction think that if you think about growth and you think about success and you'll find the people that'll help can courage it and promote it. I was always thinking that this was going to work. I just didn't know how or when hand and let's face it. I got a lot of encouragement people were like, wow, this is really great. This is a great idea. You know, I got a lot of how come no one's ever done this before and those really Give me a lot of a lot of encouragement to continue and I also got a few people who are peanut butter. Why would you go into Pi by Magic guy? Like here? I am. I wanted to be a lawyer. My parents were all just in our son's going to be a lawyer.

2 (13m 35s):
We're so proud and then I decide not to go to law school jump out of the outsets. You know, I graduated agree Environmental Policy. I moved to San Francisco Bay area and I worked at a restaurant and point raised Station House Cafe worked at that restaurant for a year moved to Colorado. My parents are now. Oh my our son. He's confused either. He'll figure it out. And then I come to my mom and dad and I go Mom Dad. I figured out what I want to do something you're going back to school. You want to be a No-No to make organic peanut butter and almond butter and my parents were like, oh what have we done couldn't be done, you know it. So I also got some naysayers and my parents of course were fabulous, but it was a lot of people also had a lot of skepticism because it's a huge category which huge companies and it had been the same for a Long time and that's where I got lucky.

1 (14m 24s):
I imagine that when you were working at that restaurant in Point Reyes, you weren't thinking I'm gonna do nut Butters. Like there was some point where you had a revelation, you know, where you thought this is the thing I want to do and then it kind of stuck with you. What's your recommendation for finding an idea coming up with something to start?

2 (14m 43s):
Wow. I don't know for me. There's two things that I did write number one. When I was up till 3:00 in the morning writing a business plan, you know, grinding almonds and peanuts and adding the hot pepper and cinnamon and fresh banana and dried banana and chocolate and staying up all night and eating until I had a lie down on my back because I just couldn't fit anymore. And you know when I was up all night doing this stuff and then I the holy crap. It's 3:00 in the morning. I knew that this was something powerful because it has such a grip on me and it was so exciting and it You like work and still doesn't and that's the whole goal is never one.

2 (15m 23s):
I knew there was something there because it was it was really fun. And the second thing was I was very optimistically cautious. Right? So I am I worked second jobs. I was waiting tables up until I had two employees think I dropped it re I know selling backpacks and skis and sleeping bags when I had five employees. And so I was I was constantly putting everybody else first to make sure that you know, we can make payroll. Well, we can keep making the products. I'll get health insurance somewhere else. I'll have a second job. And so I didn't take the total leak until everybody else is being paid fair and living wages. And then I finally see a poke myself a fair living wage.

2 (16m 3s):
So even though I had all this confidence I put I put a lot of people first to make sure the business was being served before I was being served. All right. We're getting questions here from

1 (16m 14s):
our listeners and this is from random text from YouTube this person asks, I sell a Brewing Co Co Coffee alternative at a farmers market. What advice do you have for someone like me who is selling at a farmers market but wants to move to Regional distribution.

2 (16m 28s):
The first thing you have to do is start locally, right? You have to own your home and that gives you some success there. Then once you own your home you permission to move out to the next layer and the next layer can be specialty Gourmet stores. You can be coffee shops. It could be natural food stores and then you can centrically keep growing but you have to own your home and if you can do well in your home Market that will give you the The success in the momentum to continue to that next concentric ring.

1 (16m 54s):
So essentially you're saying this person has to when you say owned the home like the farmers market people who come to the farmers market need to know. Oh, you want Brewing Co Co that's where you got to go.

2 (17m 4s):
You got to get it into all the other coffee shops. You gotta get the hardware store. You got to get it in grabbing Go locations to grocery stores. What's crazy is if you see one product in one store once you kind of like forget it, but if you see the same product in four or five different, Source you like all right. All right clearly I have to try this product and so owning your home is getting it everywhere and once you own your home you can kind of understand your consumer understand where you belong maybe coffee shops is your direction. Well, maybe groceries your direction maybe, you know performance outdoor sources your direction and if you own your home you can kind of you know assess what's working. What is it and it take that and you can

1 (17m 45s):
expand it. All right. Here's another question from Facebook Stephen Eli sinner. Stephanie asks now that more competitors are coming up with their own natural organic versions of nut Butters. How does Justin stay differentiated and the brand of

2 (17m 59s):
choice? That's a really tough question is one that you know, I haven't had to think about before and in so right now there's multiple ways. Number one. We have to stay consistent. We have to continue to deliver a high quality products. We can't take any steps backwards because that'll give a consumer reason to leads. The second thing we have to do is be better continue to Better products innovate the new categories and I think the most important thing is really have a greater purpose that buying a jar of almond butter. Not only is it good for our bodies because it's a high-protein plant based product, but we're supporting farmers were supporting pollinators were supporting under relief programs or supporting non-GMO organic regenerative all the things that are going to restore balance to our bodies and the Earth and I think purpose is really important.

2 (18m 46s):
All right.

1 (18m 46s):
Here's a question from Jessica Goldstein. Jessica's curious why the presence of palm oil or anything other than just nuts or is it necessary as additions to your products? I'm looking at your ingredients and it's just dry roasted almonds and palm oil. So

2 (19m 2s):
why the great question so palm oil is in a lot of food products and if it's harvested correctly, it's really a beneficial oil because it's a non hydrogenated oil that helps contain those free and loose almond peanut oil so you don't have to continue to always start it. Then pain was controversial and so we've done a really good job identifying sustainably grown palm oil so we can make sure that we're giving back to our communities to our consumers the places we buy it and and that's why we use it.

1 (19m 35s):
There are palm oils that are grown organically and sustainably and I've gained I use it for cooking sometimes but there's of course other parts of the world where forests are clear-cut to plant palm oil Groves and that's where a lot of the controversy

2 (19m 49s):
Trump I'm almost in a lot of food products. It's in a lot of Cosmetics where they don't have ingredients statements. He's in cookies. It's an ice cream. It's in chocolates. And what's interesting is with our products. We use a very very small percent of it. But when there's two ingredients, right, it's very visible

1 (20m 8s):
before we let you go Justin. What's something that you kind of want to take away from the last year with you in the future when let's say the company goes back to normal and you are on the road again, and you're traveling again. Again, or you're you know, you're back in the office. What's something that you kind of learned about about yourself or about your leadership style or about the way you you want to work that you want to continue to do after this pandemic? Hopefully

2 (20m 32s):
ends. I don't know if we'll ever experienced normal. Whatever normal is is what we're living today, right? So this is normal and I think that when the world involves, I think that this need to travel and this need to be in person and this need to be From our family. I think that will evolve and I'm not saying that this is going to be the future but this is a part of the future and I think that we all need to consider. What does that mean? And how does that impact Our Lives? What were the opportunities for food products for snacking? How does that evolve categories and grocery? How does it evolve way we interact with each other and so it gets me really excited to think about that and the most important thing for me and we talked about this off the air was the time I've spent with my family that I wouldn't have otherwise and that's really precious and that has me reconsidering my needs and wants not only for the organization but also for my

1 (21m 27s):
family that's an excerpt from my conversation with Justin gold founder of Justin's to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other Actual NPR events. You can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzger with help from JC Howard. Will Mitchell Bruce Grant Matt Adams L. Mannion Gianna cappadonna, John, Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Farah Safari.

1 (22m 9s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you back here in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR.