1 (0s):
Hey, welcome to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm guy Roz. So each week. I've been doing live video conversations with Founders and entrepreneurs about how they're building resilience into their businesses right now. And in case you missed them when they happen live, we're posting excerpts right here in your podcast feed and today. I'm bringing you my conversation with Sarah LaFleur the founder of mmm LaFleur. We featured Sarah on the podcast just a few months ago in February. But since that, of course A lot has changed. Mmm LaFleur sells high quality. A classic clothing to working women who don't think too hard about getting dressed in the morning. But since the global health and economic crisis Terrace customers many of whom work in law finance and politics aren't going into the office.

1 (44s):
So these days Sarah's learning to Pivot.

2 (47s):
Yeah. Definitely. I mean it was kind of crazy how quickly things turned, you know, we knew covid was coming and actually because we have a lot of Partners out in East Asia and Southeast Asia we even back in We knew that this was really affecting our supply chain and our partners. We said to ourselves like this could really become a problem if it comes to the US but I think we were honestly just a little naive at that point and then come Monday. I think this was March 12th or something. We had our best retail Day saying like Hawk maybe like covid won't affect us and then five days later we closed all of our stores and just even in all the scenario planning. We had done nothing I think prepared us for just how much worse it was going to be.

1 (1m 28s):
Yes, sir. We had been high man. On from Rent the Runway and you know, one of the points you made is that most businesses aren't prepared for low or no Revenue periods for an extended amount of

2 (1m 39s):
time totally crew. I mean, I you know, the first thing I actually we did is we actually looked at our insurance policy. It's that thing called Act of God, right? You you never really anticipate an act of God situation when you're running your business because damn it's a little hard enough as it is like I think, you know being in New York we Hurricane Sandy and then there was also that period where electricity just shut off, but even those I think the recovery period was 2 to 3 weeks at best. This is totally

1 (2m 11s):
unprecedented. We had mercy Kilgore on she described how last year was such an incredible year for her shoe brand that they ordered like 30% more inventory. And of course they're left with so much that inventory because they depend on retailers. Are you facing a similar challenge? I

2 (2m 27s):
think one thing that maybe is in our favor is we as a business have a lot of Evergreen inventory inventories is a funny one. Like you can never win. You have too much you lose you have to little you lose. It's always a tricky thing. I think one thing that we as a team have been talking about is like for example summer collection. We ordered this summer collection thinking everyone was going to be out and about and enjoying the summer and having brunch outdoors and whatever that is, right? And so we're lucky that even though maybe not all of that inventory is Situationally appropriate we have a lot of great Evergreen inventory that we've been holding onto. So a lot of what we're doing internally is saying like Okay, how can we take this inventory that we have and actually Market it differently and make it appealing to her in this situation that she's living in one example, I'll give is just we have these pants on Colby pants origami suiting and it was called origami suiting because it was considered a suiting pants, but it had an elastic waistband you could just hold it up and throw it in your suitcase and you can pull it out on the other end wrinkle free and it's also So machine washable, so we renamed it origami joggers, which is actually how I wear those pants because it has a great elastic waistband and sales basically had gone from like call it we were selling a hundred units and gone from like a hundred units to 8 units right after covid hit now.

2 (3m 46s):
It's surpassed a hundred units again and become our I think it was her second best seller left the past two weeks. So a lot of what we're realizing is like recontextualizing your inventory goes a long way. I think if you're in the business of selling real products,

1 (3m 59s):
sir. Me ask you you've had to make a whole series of decisions that you just never anticipated having to make can you kind of like walk me through, you know sort of how you've approached just leadership over the last eight weeks and 10 weeks and what you've started to learn about yourself as a leader.

2 (4m 16s):
Yeah aside from maybe the store closings and I mean really talk about the safety of our team. I think every other decision I have made in some other context. So whether that's about cost cutting or having to restructure the team furloughs a new one, you know, we've never done that before but the tricky thing about code is that all these decisions are happening at the same time as opposed to in separate situations and also because all these things are happening at the same time and the world is changing. So rapidly that decision that you made a week ago is really no longer relevant this week. So it's just the speed of decision making that I think is accelerated so much and then just in terms of like how I am managing as a leader.

2 (4m 58s):
I think fundamentally, it's With the questions, like are you in a good place to make those decisions and what I mean by that is it's incredibly stressful. I'm sure there isn't a single CEO out there who isn't up at 4 a.m. You know thinking like, oh God, I'm gonna do about that. But the most important thing is kind of keeping your wits about you. That's really what I have prioritized and I have learned to prioritize over the years because I have had experiences where I feel myself spiraling out of control and when when you do that, That there was not a Sound Decision that's going to come out of you. So a lot of what I am focused on truthfully. It's just kind of checking in with myself and saying like they're a mentally are you are you good, you know, are you in a position to make good decisions?

1 (5m 45s):
Yeah. That was a question from Betsy sudha. She asked me what strategies are you using for dealing with stress and pressure and I think she referenced I think the podcast where she says, are you still having whiskey on ice in the middle of the night moments totally I'm

2 (5m 57s):
pregnant now and that I have to say I miss my wife Be more than anything. So which to Tonic with lots of lime juice? Well, it's really hard but you know, I would say one thing that feels dramatically different for me right now is that I've got a stellar executive team who I adore and they're very calm and very supporting supporting of each other and supporting a theme and I haven't always had that, you know, No, I think between 2018 and 2019 we have to go through another big restructuring and when that happened I felt so alone at that time and I just remember like popping Tom's every day at work because like you know that that's how you keep your acid reflux.

2 (6m 44s):
Yeah. Yeah, and it was a miserable time for me. You know, I think I was so darn focused on not letting my team see that I was not in a good place. But ultimately I just I was miserable and well long story short like my two closest girlfriends and my husband kind of staged just Ensign that said like you are not okay, you need some help like you figure this out which led me to kind of me rethinking my executive team. I brought in someone phenomenally experienced detox a lot about like 2001 and then crash after Lehman. I think even just seeing this crisis through his eyes. I mean I was working when Lehman happened but I was an analyst I wasn't seeing the really tough decisions that were being made at top and so just to have him and my other Executives and R by me it's been a

1 (7m 31s):
real change, you know Sarah it's still early. We're like 10 weeks into this right but are their creative ways that you're thinking about shifting around and meeting your customers a different way to try and meet the moment.

2 (7m 45s):
Absolutely. I mean, I think I think we've never seen ourselves as a work where brand we've always seen ourselves as a brand for working women and that distinction might seem like what's the difference but it turns out there's a big one especially under covid right where suddenly working women a lot of them. Moms are having to go through an entirely different pace of life. One of the first things we did was we launched the slack channel to our customers rmm community and just invited them to join and then we had you know, the one of the slack channels I think it's called Mmm. Lefur where our customer service say it sharing honestly like dog and cat photos but like from that ultimately like there are a lot of things that came out of that slack Channel.

2 (8m 26s):
There's no mmm job boards for people who have been let go and her looking for new jobs. So and then customers are actually uploading and sharing different opportunities that have come their way and using it as you know a tool to just help other people find jobs other and them customers find jobs. So that's been really inspiring another thing that we launched this virtual appointments because you know, when one of the things that we really love in our stores is a lot of our customers book these one-on-one appointments, you know, the whole point is that you don't have to comb through all this merchandise. It's our stylist who are going to do the work for you. And obviously that is no longer happening, but he launched virtual appointments and it's now doing I think as much revenue as one of our best stores.

2 (9m 9s):
I think a lot of women see this as like a little like self-care moment for themselves where get to take 30 45 minutes and someone else is saying like hey, how are you doing with your clothing needs like the conversations go much deeper than clothing needs. Like I've got two kids at home. My husband has covid and so he's not here. And so I need to make sure that I look okay. Appropriate for the coal, but I'm going to also be holding a baby simultaneously like what outfits do you think makes sense that level of conversation? That's how happening and happening in our virtual appointment. So maybe points is is actually more working mom friendly than asking a mom to come into a store. So definitely definitely a lot of innovative things coming out of this moment acts of desperation will make you think creatively

1 (9m 55s):
when we come back in just a moment. We're going to hear how Sarah plans to Pivot her marketing strategy and She hopes to take away from this difficult period stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So a lot has changed at MM LaFleur since stay-at-home restrictions have been in place.

1 (10m 38s):
Sarah's team has started to do virtual consults with clients who want to look professional during video calls in tears thinking about the future of work because it'll probably change the future of her business. I think there's no doubt. There's going to be a disruption to the way we work. What does that mean for how your business will have to Pivot because you can have to meet your Summers where they are, right it may mean that fewer professional women are going into an office everyday like sort of walk me through how mmm LaFleur May kind of become a sort of almost a different company in the future.

2 (11m 13s):
We've been spending a lot of time thinking about that but I think one big aha moment I had is we actually we're already seeing this trend for a few years. I think last time when I was on your podcast, we talked about the launch of power casual and how that was our fastest growing category. And so that was really Freelancers women who worked in Attack or marketing medium or casual Industries. It's now 53 percent of our Revenue pretty covid. It was already I want to say like in the early 40s, but basically covid just like push it up. So now it's the majority of our sales. We were lucky that we had already kind of pivoted into that direction. And then this covid thing is for sure only going to accelerate it. I mean, it's a great question like suiting what does suiting mean in this new world, you know, my aunt Agatha.

2 (11m 54s):
She's a public defender and she only wears skirt suits to court because As you know pant suits you never know. What kind of Judge you're going to get and you just never want to hurt your clients chances now, she's doing Zoom by court and she doesn't actually have to wear a skirt suit and she's probably working something underneath but but you know, so maybe the need for skirt suits go out go out the window, but I think again we were we were fortunate that that wasn't such a big part of our business anymore.

1 (12m 22s):
I mean, it's amazing because what really started in 2011 as a brand for professional women and many of your initial clients were lawyers and I and that's and we talked about this in the podcast. It's one of the only reasons why you such a big presence in Washington DC because there's so many women lawyers in DC who were early clients. So it's I mean this could really kind of pivot into a business that is where you still have that the professional clothing but also more of the Casual leisurewear.

2 (12m 53s):
Yeah, exactly. And I think what we take so much pride in what my creative director Miyako takes so much pride in is He wants to make the most comfortable clothes that are machine washable and easy to care for and also makes you look good. Right so their clothes that make you look like you stepped it up a notch, but all the factors of comfort are there that's going to matter regardless of whether you're having to be in a courtroom or you're having to work, you know eight hours a day just like staring at your computer screen on Zoom. So I think our customer isn't going anywhere. I think it's just, you know, we were going to need To keep moving forward with

1 (13m 30s):
her because an important question. This is from Rodney Aurora androgyny asks, how are you marketing your products right

2 (13m 37s):
now. So one of the big things that we did right before we went into covid we were going to dress any female candidate who is running for office for free. We were going to rent are close to her or donate are close to her. And then she after her use would donate it to bottomless closet which is another wonderful nonprofit organization. It turned into this huge marketing initiative like Croatian. Media Outlets were writing about it. So but obviously there's a lot of women who are not campaigning on the campaign Trail. Anyway that they're campaigning is being done from home. One thing we're doing there is actually just featuring some of these women and getting them to talk about you know, what are the issues that they care about and how are they how are they campaigning during this difficult time?

2 (14m 19s):
We're sharing that on our work. We have a newsletter called the EM - so we're continuing to kind of, you know, make sure that customers understand what it is that we stand for even if women aren't necessarily. A out there talking digital marketing. I you know that's kind of if that's top of funnel marketing and digital marketing is all the way at the bottom where we continue to do that too. We have pulled back ad spend on just channels where we were seeing, you know marketing speak long payback period because we wanted our money to be as efficient as possible, but all of our ads like, you know, one of our best performing ads and emails came from the quarantine uniform seven perfect pieces for foreign see that was really one of our best best performing ads and so I think Pretending like the world hasn't changed is not good for anyone especially not your business and I think recognizing the situation that your customers are in is that's marketing

1 (15m 8s):
101. It's so interesting. I want to get to one more question. If this from Jonathan Lander, he asks, you know, do you think that this will have a disproportionate impact on women in business and if so, how can we minimize that impact? Yes.

2 (15m 22s):
I mean, I think it even it around me. I know of some friends who have either gone part-time or they just finds that the lifestyle. Taking care of kids and having to manage a full-time job totally impossible. So they're they're either taking time off. We're leaving. It's a real thing and it's really painful to see how you know, the burden is falling on women. I think disproportionately. It's probably affecting lower income women, but obviously in the in the kind of professional class to you're seeing it and I think you know trying to understand women's place in the in the new normal Workforce and how we get more women back into it. That's going to be a huge challenge

1 (16m 3s):
when you look back at this moment. Now, what is it that you want to have learned from it or to have changed about the way you you see yourself as a leader the way you see your business the way you see your life when you can reflect that and say that's what I learned from that time period what what do you want that to be?

2 (16m 19s):
You know, the first thing I would say is I would like to I think it was always been my number one goal that I want to be known as the leader who is really there for her team because I'm so I connected When attached to them, so that's probably number one personal motto that my parents always say is you know, it kind of the if you need Triumph and disaster and treat them both just the same. It's the if like it's a poem from Rudyard Kipling's if write this ideas of meeting both the greatest wins in your business and the greatest crises in your business. And I think if you can stay true to yourself through all of that, that's the most important thing I think for any founder any business owner.

2 (17m 2s):
So, you know, they're going to be so many challenging moments ahead. I think to be able to emerge true to yourself is probably the most important thing

1 (17m 10s):
love it Sarah LaFleur co-founder of mmm LaFleur. Thank you so much for being with us. Really appreciate

2 (17m 16s):
it. Yeah, and it's wonderful you're doing this. Thank you for thank you for having me.

1 (17m 20s):
That's an excerpt for my conversation with Sarah LaFleur the founder of mmm LaFleur to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all all of our past live interviews, you can find them there and at youtube.com slash NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Kearney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you next week. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.