1 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience addition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs about how to think creatively during this really disruptive moment. And today I'm bringing you to conversations later on in the show. We'll hear from build creelman founder of the sparkling water companies Spindrift about how his Industries been affected in the past few months. But first we're going to go to Melanie Perkins. The founder of canva canva is an online graphic design platform and when we featured Melanie, And the story of canva on the show back in January of 2019. Her company was valued at a billion dollars, but just a few days ago canva announce that they closed a new round that now values the company at six billion dollars.

1 (44s):
Melanie's going me from her home in Sydney Australia and she talked about the challenges of managing more than 900 employees from home and how the company is sustaining itself during the pandemic. So first of all, I mean have you have you guys had to face layoffs? I know you Had about 900 employees last time I checked have you had to go through that at all?

3 (1m 5s):
No, we've been in a fortunate position that we're profitable company. We had no strong cash reserves and canvas continue to grow rapidly throughout this throughout this time. I think that the challenges of navigating from an online offline World, we're all meeting and that's why it's such a big part of our culture online that has been relatively smooth I guess because most of our things were already online. We're already working in an online world, but I think that what I really feel isn't a huge sense of responsibility. So while we're sort of a stable ship, you know, we've got so many students and teachers that are trying to navigate this whole work from home school from home and well and that's it's such a huge radical transition.

3 (1m 51s):
We have all of our businesses small businesses across the globe were having such a challenging time right now. And so we really feel a huge responsibility to do whatever we can in order. To help everyone else across to

1 (2m 1s):
go. Yeah. And what about what about your employees in Australia? I mean I used to working remotely.

3 (2m 7s):
So everyone's working from home at a certain point in time will enable people to go back into the office to work from the office if they so choose but we're not going to be making it compulsory work from the office probably for this whole year to ensure that everyone can have that flexibility as they need it

1 (2m 24s):
and I think Australia is starting to open up schools are going back in session and some places are other mrs. That you know of like going back to normal yet or not

3 (2m 32s):
quite not quite still the government's suggestion is to work from home and wherever you possibly can and we really believe that sort of doing our part to help continue to slow the spread even as the cases go down. We certainly all don't want to see a second ways. And so, you know being able to have the not so many people in public transport or commuting or whatever. It may be I think is really important just to do our part when this pandemic set out upon us. I guess it was really important that we Personally, I guiding principles in the first one was a safety and well-being is the number one and most important thing at all times that sort of meant that we early March has he started working from home prior to the government recommendations and then making sure we're supporting our community and then rallying together and growing and they're sort of been the three pillars that we've made all of the decisions for our company based upon in the months gone

1 (3m 25s):
not want to ask you to put your entrepreneurs head on and I remember doing an interview you came to San Francisco. You met this one investor, you know, nothing about him except he spoke to your college and / in Perth Australia you went out there. And you said oh, yeah, I happened to be out here and can I see you and you really hustled but you also described herself as an introvert. I'm I remember you said you're really naturally introverted. But when you have a goal you will force yourself to do everything you need to do to like achieve that goal. We get a lot of questions from introverted entrepreneurs, you know who have a hard time asking for help or asking, you know for funding or things like that, especially this moment like Kind of advice. Could you give to somebody who like you is introverted and maybe a little bit nervous to put themselves out

3 (4m 5s):
there? I think that goal is definitely power-ups me when I have a goal. I think that everything else would have Fades into the background. My nerves might still be there my or whatever else it might be. That might be a might be a bit scary. But it when I have a goal, I think I put absolutely everything I can in to achieve that so you're right in the early days. It was trying to find investors now. It's my goal is how can we support our community? We've got 30 million people around the world that are relying on canva to help with their social media to help their marketing to help with the education. And so I think it's so important that we are able to support our community support our team. We made a statement early on that. We're going to ensure all of our contractors were continued to be paid throughout this recession throughout throughout this time.

3 (4m 50s):
And so I think that the goals are still stayed the same in the early days the goal was, you know, trying to get funding now, it's trying to ensure our team is safe and our Is supported so I guess the introversion just becomes certainly fits better into the background a

1 (5m 5s):
little. Yeah. Well, you don't really have a choice now, right you're running a company 900 people kind of have to fake it until you become it. I guess.

3 (5m 13s):
Yeah, and I guess introversion a lot of people think he's being shy but actually introversion is that where you get your energy from and so I get my energy just being by myself for a little Lords with my partner and so being able to have a little bit of time alone every day is pretty important and I guess in this whole I select I so well I guess everyone is at home a lot more. So maybe it's an introvert introverts world

1 (5m 34s):
right now. So it's like you're drinking red bull all day. You've got so much energy savings. So here's a question about the sort of the business side of things. Right because canva is a has a freemium model right? It's you can and I'm sure a huge number maybe most of your users are using the free version. It's really great you have access to thousands of photos and there's a subscription. I think it's like 10 bucks a month and in the US and then 30 bucks a month for premium one. How do you monetize the free version of canvas?

3 (6m 3s):
I guess it goes back to what I was saying before around giving as much value as you can and so that's been one of our philosophies right from the early days was we want to ensure that people are able to get heated value from canva and there's no blockers. And so we made can have a completely free you can go you can go and purchase some images you can upgrade to the free version. But if you are wherever you are in the world, whatever your economic situation we wanted to ensure that you had access to design early on. I remember trying to get a brochure design if it was going to cost a thousand dollars a week who can afford a thousand dollars to get a version designed and I guess that's why we wanted to ensure that everyone had access to Great design. And so it wasn't something that only a few people can go and afford and so I guess that's exactly why we have a free version and it's so philosophically important to canva and

1 (6m 52s):
essentially the free version is funded by the people who are paying for the subscriptions, right?

3 (6m 57s):
Yeah. That's exactly right. Talk to me a little about

1 (6m 59s):
your sort of Leadership, how is your sort of leadership and your leadership style and and just your own Comfort level at being a CEO in a leader of a big organization evolved. I think

3 (7m 9s):
that it's everything's just a continuous work in progress. He never going to have all the answers. I think if I was dropped into a 900 person company with millions of people around the world using our product that would be quite scary. But every single day is just like a few more people are at the company the few biggest challenges and so you kind of just build up that muscle. Well as we grow the thing that I'm probably most proud of a camera is seeing our culture seeing how a team has been able to Rally through this crazy period like one day we said, okay, we realize we're going to have to shut down the office. We're gonna have to have everyone working from home the next day. We had an onboarding class. So we had 35 people that were joining canva, but they was already transitioned to work from home was just incredible seeing how rapidly were able to transition to an online environment, but I think Behind that is really been at Value.

3 (8m 2s):
So being able to Rally people behind the goals of being forceful go to supporting our community. I think that that is what inspires people, you know, everything that we've done that canva from structure to the way we onboard newbies and share context has really been around helping to facilitate setting crazy because actually making them happen.

1 (8m 24s):
This is a question from Jason Lee by Facebook again to put your entrepreneur hat on you started. Us business in I think you launched Canada in 2012, but you were you had a tough time like raising money at first explaining to investors what this was if you were starting this business now, how do you think you would have approached it differently if you were starting something right now, where would you even begin? I think the same place

3 (8m 48s):
we began back then and solving a problem that affects a lot of people or even a really small number of people to start with. It solves their problem really? Well, I think is as important now as it was back then And when we started our first company and online design system to create school yearbooks are we had no business experience marketing experience like any relevant experience whatsoever and it was so critical that we just solved your problem really? Well, which was the school yearbook coordinators had a difficult time creating your books just like starting at that really small things starting these and then going wide I think is a really important and you just have to like learn a little every day believing this concept of just-in-time learning kind of just learn everything just Just in time or often just after you need to know it.

3 (9m 33s):
I think that you know starting a business today would be really similar to starting a business back. Then you just have to find a problem solver well and then just keep on learning as you go,

1 (9m 42s):
you know given that I mean when you started out you were making you were making physical yearbooks, right? Like you were printing them. I think you're printing them out of your parents house. But now I mean especially now when people are kind of shut in things are distributed digitally they're going to be distributed digitally more and more. So how do you think sort of the design elements? You offer will change and even the approach to design will change as people kind of come to the realization that maybe physical products objects that require design won't come in a physical form.

3 (10m 11s):
Yeah, it's been incredible saying just within our own community that transition really rapid transition of what they were creating. So they're creating less event invitations are in creating Less business cards, the creating less Flyers all of the things that sort of really resonate with the physical world and what they are creating way more of his things. Like Zoom backgrounds and presentations and your learning materials for students and teachers and social media content to be able to communicate with their community. So that was a huge swing. It was almost overnight that the transition happened. So marketing teams are design teams are templates designers everyone tried to transition and a dime to the to this new world.

3 (10m 54s):
I'm to help facilitate all of the new things and it people needed to design people are designing more but completely differently. I'm to what they were diet designing prior.

1 (11m 2s):
So like what what's an example like, I mean even in the way people are designing things. Are you starting to see anything unusual or different? Yeah, just the

3 (11m 10s):
really the doctype the things that people are actually designing his transition dramatically the e-commerce posts and ads and social media posts and I'm presentations and infographics really should sharp Spike and infographics as well. Even when we look inside our own company previously when it Runs Kansas versary. He will also sign of physical card. Of course that is no longer possible. So people siding digital cards on cam for now and then we send that around with lots and lots of gifts in them, which is a bit of fun

1 (11m 45s):
Mel Before. I Let You Go in five years time when you look back at this moment and you're like, oh my God, that was crazy. But we became better and did this as a result? What is it? You want to be able to

3 (11m 56s):
say I hope as well the way we can out of this more connected more caring about Humanity well care about every single person's health. Every single person's ability to have basic human rights, that would be amazing. If from a community perspective. I really hope that we can come out of it and say we did everything we could to support the small businesses and the students and the teachers that rely on us all of our community and I hope in a team level that we were able to say that we did an incredible job of supporting everyone through this trying time their mental health their physical well-being their connectedness. I would love to hear you. Say that one all three of those

1 (12m 32s):
weapons. Well, I know that I've been watching my children my son work on his fifth grade school yearbook on canvas. Oh, there you go. One of the billion students headed home Tony Perkins. Thank you so much for joining

3 (12m 46s):
us. Thank you so much. I really appreciate it.

1 (12m 49s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Melanie Perkins founder of canva when we come back in just a moment. We'll hear from build creelman the founder of Spindrift about how sparkling water is fine. Success in e-commerce stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsored great. We've all been doing our part to keep our communities healthy including shopping from home great has been sending shoes straight to your door since 2014. They make premium quality Classics that are designed to play nice with everything in your wardrobe and are built to last and greats only works with factories that are committed to the highest environmental and labor standards for 25% off your first purchase use code how I Put this on great.com.

1 (13m 44s):
That's grea t s.com. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So when we first featured bill creelman on the show six months ago Spindrift was gearing up for its biggest year yet. But since then trade shows have been cancelled and many restaurants including those that sell Spindrift cans are closed. I caught up with Bill at his home in Massachusetts what he's been trying to keep his team safe and also trying to meet an unexpected demand for sparkling water. We had Gary Erickson. And and kick Crawford on the co-owners cofounders of Cliff bar, and they had like there was like a run on Cliff Bars, like people he knows like toilet paper and Cliff Bars and they just it was just a massive spike in people buying up shelf stable products.

1 (14m 36s):
Did you see anything like that initially?

2 (14m 38s):
We did we absolutely did when the initial push came we saw anywhere from, you know, sort of two to four hundred percent lift shelves suddenly blown, you know a huge push to get trucks pulled forward. At the same time. I think the hard thing and really the hard thing for our brain especially was that our Food Service Partners obviously felt pressure the other way suddenly, you know, they didn't have business to to fulfill. And so what we struggled with was really, you know, kind of balancing being a good partner for the food service. We know many of whom are friends and longtime colleagues and really helping them or thinking with them through how to respond as well as servicing the rest of the business that was having this huge up to In sales,

1 (15m 23s):
you're talking about like the small like a fast casual restaurants that also sell

2 (15m 27s):
Spindrift, right? Yeah, if the small guys I mean even Starbucks of the world and speak Reen's and Panera and you know, these are these are you know, we would count these people not just as customers or spend your for really is the people that have helped, you know, bring Spindrift into the Forefront and you know, their linemen of food and their value system and ours, you know, really was a big part of our brain growth and we felt compelled to really try to work. With them wherever we could to help help them as they went through this together.

1 (15m 56s):
And now have you seen a Slowdown in sales. I mean, I would imagine you you have because part of the business requires people to pass by the displays in grocery stores. And if anyone watching has been the grocery store like me you go in and out really fast like you just blazed through there and try to

2 (16m 13s):
get out. Yeah, so I would describe it as really kind of people moving around in different channels. We are an omni-channel brand we made a pretty big decision to move. Into some of the Comm channels early on what I would describe is a move kind of unfortunately out of some of the food service and the convenience channels that were really affected and then into some of the channels that like, you know target.com Costco instacart. It's been incredibly Dynamic and continues to be dynamic. So we feel very fortunate. I mean people are drinking a lot of sparkling water. And so we do, you know, generally I would say we continue to push towards, you know our plan that we had for the year and that's kind of something we're looking at continuously

1 (17m 1s):
bill as you look forward. I mean, I imagine that like most businesses 2020 was was going to be your biggest year ever. I think it doesn't seem as if the economy will open up, you know much more significantly is infection rates increase e-commerce may may be increasing but it may not actually increase as much as the decrease in sales at Supermarkets and that big box stores. So how how are you thinking about just keeping things in line

2 (17m 29s):
wealth every day. It's an everyday conversation. I think you know, we see it two ways. I mean it's really hard just in general the economy side, you know, the pandemic the shopping habits. And so we want to be a sympathetic and supported partner on the other hand. We're optimistic, you know, our biggest challenge is getting people that used to drink natural flavor Sparkling Waters to try and alter Negative brand that's how we want them to do. We just want them to try our product, you know, and we believe that if enough people try our product and taste how different the liquid is and the flavor and the mouthfeel all those sorts of things that they percentage of them will stay with the brand and so the great thing about almost caution using that word but the shifting channels is really prompted consumers to try a lot of different things that they wouldn't otherwise try baby because the product wasn't available the And they were used to maybe because their shopping in a channel that we weren't normally as visible as we are and now we're more visible.

2 (18m 29s):
I'm not sure there's a lot of different drivers. So we remain optimistic that as we go into the summer that a percentage of the consumers that have discovered spendthrift are going to stay with us on the ingredients. I because our product is about transparency and kind of knowing what you're drinking, you know, we see that move now more and more as you know, as people are more cautious and they want to be healthy in given something, you know. The health concerns that are at large we feel we might be able to offer something that does give them a little bit more Assurance of what exactly there is are

1 (18m 59s):
trying, you know, Bill. I remember in the episode you talked about how you sold your your first company or actually it was just sort of a second company to Diageo. It was called stirrings it made cocktail mixers and things and leaving that business when you left that it kind of gave you space to come up with a new idea and that idea of course eventually became Spindrift. Right. Now a lot of small business owners are a kind of in that situation that you are in where you know, they're sort of being forced to step away from their businesses right now, which is incredibly stressful. Do you have any advice on how to kind of stay focused and think creatively and be open to look looking for new ideas and coming up with new ideas.

1 (19m 44s):
It's such a such a challenging time.

2 (19m 47s):
It's a great question. We so we started our development for spend Earth in the middle. the economic downturn in 2002 know sort of seven eight nine when we launched the first batch in 2010 there hadn't been innovation in the food and beverage Market in sort of three years, you know because at that time it was almost it's that felt weird and almost inappropriate to have new products and you sort of are you're entering a little bit of that phase right now where retailers I think are going to be looking harder at the brands they have and won't have the bandwidth or to to shopping conditions or ever variety of factors. So if I were an entrepreneur starting to think about a new idea or pivoting an idea that business they have I actually think there will be lots of opportunity coming out of this.

2 (20m 34s):
I mean we in some ways by The Innovation pipeline kind of slowing down a little bit as typically happens during Cycles like this. It gives you a chance to be louder and it's a less crowded, you know Marketplace and the investment often is less because there's just less noise. You don't have to spend as much to amplify your message. So, you know again it's hard in the middle of it right now. But I think I absolutely think there's going to be opportunities coming out of this and and even you know, kind of during it and it wouldn't surprise me at all. If you see one of these, you know business is that we all knew and understood pre covid coming out with a better version of itself and it ends up moving the whole category whatever category that is forward.

1 (21m 20s):
How do you imagine this? Crisis will change your business model. I mean do you think that you're going to emphasize e-commerce more you're going to rethink how you distribute your product or maybe not

2 (21m 36s):
we will do all of those things and I think any think all of us in the food and beverage and cpg more broadly are having these discussions. I think it's hard. It's a it's a little bit early to draw any real conclusions and our view our biggest thing where the Most excited about is that within an environment where people are being more thoughtful and are able to spend some more time thinking about their purchases for the brands that have a deeper story a richer story more of an in a more nuanced story, which is how we think about our brand there seems to be now. Maybe there's an opportunity to for longer more in-depth storytelling and that that gets me excited.

2 (22m 18s):
I hope our stories more interesting the more people learn and I think that's true of a lot of food. And beverage brands that are pioneering and category that are doing something really different. You need you need people to hit pause and spend a minute or two longer considering the purchase. And so that's what we're hopeful. We'll be one of the things that comes out of this

1 (22m 37s):
bill. I want to turn to I mean, obviously I subject that has been so overwhelming and and crucial and important in the in the United States and around the world and has been brought to the surface again recently through Mass demonstrations. Racial Justice. As you know, and I'm at this is actually question from one of our listeners viewers Claire morishima, this moment feels different from a business perspective because business has traditionally stay quiet when it comes to matters that are challenging or uncomfortable or political or whatever. They might be. Basically the playbook for businesses is say nothing from spin trust perspective you make sparkling water, right and you could look at it from that perspective and say we make sparkling water.

1 (23m 22s):
That's what we do. Do but at the same time, you know consumer purchases also a choice and we have a lot of choices to make and so I wonder whether you know you thought about this and thought we have to we have to take a stand we have to do something.

2 (23m 37s):
Yeah, I mean what an inspiring time really we have had our own Journey as you as you might expect and it started exactly as you suggest but kind of talking to our peers and advisors and board and you're right. I would say in general the group's consensus for the let's not say anything. But for me, I guess personally I was on on a bit of a personal Journey, you know, I have kids and they were asking questions and wondering you know, what they were trying to find their voice. You know, we we are 32 percent diverse at Sandra. So we had I felt an obligation to our our team and then is a brand, you know, our brand is never been afraid of self-evaluation.

2 (24m 22s):
We've changed who we are any number of times from the soda line to the natural flavor position to where we are. So I eventually reached a place where I felt we had a voice and the door through for us was really this idea that we can do better. We felt that way with our product. We felt that way with our culture with our communication. Why can't we do better now? Why are we suddenly You are very satisfied with how we've done so far. And so we we've published our position outwardly. We spend a lot of time evaluating really inwardly and looking hard and I'd say going forward our view is that we should be score carding ourselves the way we talk about sales in the exact same way.

2 (25m 13s):
So we're not we're not satisfied with where we are. I think it's inspired a lot of really important conversations. I'm quite proud of really how our team took to this in it and yet another opportunity for

1 (25m 29s):
betterment last question for you Bill in five years time from now. What do you want to take from this time that you continue to bring with you to your job to your leadership to your business? What is it that you want to say? This is what I learned from that moment. And this is why we're better now,

2 (25m 46s):
you know, it's funny. I think like so many others. I've been searching for kind of what is the meaning to all this and I think you know there's so much covid and pandemic side between families and loved ones and concerns and loss but I guess you know from my standpoint. I'm actually starting to feel inspired that perhaps what this was all about was this time at home that we all God with our family, you know more self-reflection and that hopefully it will lead to real change in terms of social justice. I mean wouldn't it be wonderful Awful, if if our kids are educated differently now is as a result of this and wouldn't it be wonderful if that businesses behave differently if investors invested now and more, you know diverse ownership businesses.

2 (26m 38s):
I mean, I have really struggled to find the connection, you know in my Quiet Moments between what's happened March and April and now it's happening in May and June, but I actually I actually think that this could be an incredible. Double moment for us and though she had five years. I would love to look back on this and obviously acknowledge all the challenges that we've had, but also talk about it is a time that really was incredibly important for the country in terms of moving to a new level of quality that I think previously. We just didn't have in my view. They'll

1 (27m 13s):
come and founder and CEO of Spindrift. Thank you so much for joining us Bill.

2 (27m 18s):
Thanks for having me guys. Nice to nice to talk to you and I hope you remain safe.

1 (27m 22s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Bill creelman founder of Spindrift to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia, Carney, Gianna. Dona Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.