2 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition. This is the place we've been talking with entrepreneurs about how to think creatively during this really disruptive moment now back in 2016 pretty soon after we launched how I built this we featured the story of Kathy Hughes, and if you haven't heard it, it's well worth going back to listen to Kathy built the largest African American broadcast network in the United States starting with one small radio station in Washington DC in. 81 her company Urban one has expanded to include a cable network digital brands and 54 radio stations a few days ago. I called up Kathy to find out how she's doing what's going on with the business and her thoughts on the mass demonstrations against racial Injustice happening Across America and around the world.

2 (51s):
First of all Kathy ha. How are you doing? I mean Where Do We Begin pandemic economic? Meltdown Mass demonstrations? About racial Injustice. I mean what a time what a moment in our history.

1 (1m 6s):
One of the things is giving me regular consistent daily time to meditate and pray and really concentrate on what it's going to take for us to pull ourselves out of this because the frightening thing is that everyone globally this isn't just an American problem or a black community problem. This is a global problem and it really To make most sense to solve a problem is there's no one here to participate in the benefit of the solution to the problem. Then at the same time. I'm so encouraged by the demonstrations.

1 (1m 48s):
And the number of young people that I see that aren't going to accept things being the status quo any longer we're doing a tribute to the mayor of the District of Columbia because as you know, she painted 16th Street which leads directly into the front door of the White House Black lives matter. And change the name to the black lives matter Avenue, but the issue is particularly when we're talking about business. There is never again going to be a normal entrepreneurs in general are in incredibly bad shape. I'm encouraged by the demonstration, but I'm also frightened by the reality the economic reality of how do you effectuate change when the people you're effectuating it for our sick and dying and lacking the funds to implement the changes the impact on America.

1 (2m 45s):
I don't think Media the White House. I don't think anyone's being totally true with us giving us the truth in terms of how this is going to devastate the majority of employment in the United States of America is based on small businesses small entrepreneurs. They are being wiped out. They are being totally eliminated. They were already Under Fire trying to compete what happens when we don't have these independent entrepreneurial Ventures to provide services number one in Also to provide employment so why I'm encouraged I'm also frightened.

2 (3m 21s):
Oh Kathy, it's really sobering to hear you talk about that because you're probably one of the most optimistic people I've ever met in my life. I remember when you on the show, I kept asking you about, you know, all of the struggles that you went through and I want to talk about some of them being bankrupt for years not having creditors break down your neck and and and still being positive knowing that you were going to succeed. I remember you saying I knew I had no doubt. I was worried.

3 (3m 46s):
I

2 (3m 46s):
was never worried. I wouldn't make it and that was like it was such a charge. You know, when you said that in the show because I mean you really struggled for so many years to build this now and Empire

1 (3m 57s):
they have ashamed down to have me to have to furlough 382 broadcasters about six weeks ago. When I look back at the challenges that I had the struggles that I went through to build this company. They were almost like a picnic compared. To what we're going through now, I worry so far all of our charitable Ventures have been in terms of feeding the elderly and the children so many of whom dependent on their schools to provide them with nourishment. And when you are facing starvation on the behalf of the mass this when you are faced with some people now not wanting to go back to work because they make more on unemployment then they do being games.

1 (4m 46s):
We employed so my struggles were like good days compared to what I think we're getting ready to go through in this country

2 (4m 54s):
Yeah, you mentioned Urban ones had furloughs media organizations are you know in

3 (4m 60s):
crisis our ER

1 (5m 1s):
salary was cut by 30% my CEO salary all of my personalities everyone took a 20% pay cut and so that we didn't have to have additional layoffs. But how do you keep up with your cost of living your normal everyday functions? Certainly? No one thinks that in their fourth quarter. They're going to be faced with an economic crisis because you prepare if you're smart and particularly entrepreneurs, they see being able to provide opportunity and suggestibility and a future for the people who work for them.

1 (5m 44s):
All of that is now

2 (5m 46s):
God I'm Kathy. I know that Urban one convened a town hall recently called I think it's called We Are One and just kind of shifting gears for a sec. I mean we're in this incredible moment with mass demonstrations happening all over the United States all over the world and I'm sure you've seen polls that have shown significant majorities of the American public now agree with the notion that that racial Injustice is a serious issue. It seems to be different this time these demonstrations seem to be different seem to be really creating a much more profound National discussion about racial Justice about historical memory.

1 (6m 24s):
Yes. No, it's totally different is so interesting. They my most recent favorite protest sign said all of the president's friends are not racist, but those who are not did not think the racism would be a deal-breaker what's happening with these protests these young people people. Around the world people of all ethnicities, you know all demographics. They're saying it is a deal-breaker. The reality is that history has to be sick and tired of repeating itself because these are the same issues the spark the Riots of the 60s Kent State Kent State when those kids were gunned down at that University.

1 (7m 11s):
It was a wake-up call, but almost nine minutes. All of the world could see a person murdered the trauma on our young people our children because all of the networks Facebook go everybody just keeps playing it over and over and over and over and over again. I don't think that a five eight or ten year old. I don't want at my age to see somebody murdered at the hands of another human being and then to have it it's so long. So drawn-out almost nine minutes. So you almost have to be in a coma if you had any level.

1 (7m 54s):
Like I said, you may not have been a racist but the issue of racism was not a deal-breaker for you isn't a deal breaker with the company that you work for or own. It was not a deal-breaker for you in terms of the neighborhood or education. Now it is and this murder is what triggered it. The question is. Where is the strategy who's going to be? Be responsible for figuring out. How do you fix it? The other thing that really gives me out to miss them though is the fact that we are really sticking together better than I've ever seen always there's some disagreeable element in any type of movement or change.

1 (8m 37s):
That's just human nature, but I'm seeing people being more supportive of each other across all types of lines as I said demographic. Ethnicity name something they're coming together. Oh young LGBT people are kind of shying away from being judgmental there being a lot more appreciative of human nature. And I think that started covid-19 covid-19 was an equal opportunity killer does not care about anything other than taking you out of this life and when you're faced with this hole Issue of death you start becoming sensitized I think and then with the protest behind it.

1 (9m 22s):
We were already raw. We were already nervous and concerned about what was happening that we couldn't leave our homes still a lot of the wiser ones still are not leaving their homes yet. Waiting to see if these protests are going to spike the infection rate. And so it is entirely different guy and while I'm concerned about the economics of it. That worries me at the same time. I'm optimistic and happy that is bringing us together. America is populated by the most Brilliant Minds on the planet. And so many of those most Brilliant Minds are people of color as always.

1 (10m 2s):
We will rise to the occasion. We will do what is necessary not just to save our own selves but to save and preserve the country that we love and live in

2 (10m 12s):
when we come back in just a moment. We'll hear more from Kathy about how Black businesses have been affected by covid-19 and what young entrepreneurs can take from this moment stay with us. I'm Gyros and listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR.

3 (10m 31s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn

2 (10m 41s):
more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition Kathy Hughes founded Radio 1 by purchasing a Washington DC radio station and then expanding her media Empire all across the United States DC was the city where Kathy started her incredible career and she's especially proud of what the city is doing right now. Yeah. I remember when you told you told a story about your life of you grew up in Omaha, Nebraska, you know, one of the few African American families in Omaha to I'm and you arrive to DC and I remember you describing it as it's just magical experience for you because it was a black City.

2 (11m 26s):
It

1 (11m 26s):
was still is what mayor of you or your browser just did. It happens in Washington DC. They shake the entire world. You like to always, you know, America likes to clean the dust the White House and that's the government. No, that's the people. Who is she did she painted that street her so she was talking with that paint crew. Okay. I mean wow, so, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to cut you off but it still happens to be in Washington. I couldn't have experienced that in Omaha Nebraska. You could have experienced that and Los Angeles New York Chicago that's deep.

3 (12m 1s):
Be

1 (12m 1s):
strong. I love it.

3 (12m 3s):
Yeah, I was

1 (12m 5s):
but I think about it. That's my enthusiasm returning. Thank you. So go ahead. I'm sorry. I'm still fat

2 (12m 12s):
well and during the 70 and you know during the 80s you really kind of convened a lot of conversations through your stations and DC you've got I think Urban ones got five or six stations in DC alone in the DC area, you know, you've seen and experienced a lot of businesses like sort of pay lip service to diversity and inclusion, but I wonder whether ER I mean whether you know now there's this sort of this notion that silence is taking a position that you can't be silent. We're seeing corporations. I mean I went on Amazon today and you know Amazon's got a statement about racial Injustice and it's all over the place and I wonder I mean do you do worry that it's just once again kind of you know corporations paying lip

3 (12m 51s):
service or

1 (12m 52s):
absolutely how dare the NFL commissioner talk about how they support diversity and they literally black ball. Colin Kaepernick, all right until he gets a job there apology is not legitimate in a lot of black folks mine including mine a professional football is Black Talent? All right, the oh God. No question about that and they were going to call them SOB's that fire them blackball Colin Kaepernick. And now there holier than thou oh we are so sorry. We were so wrong. That's not what should then coming out of his frickin mouth, but he's Should have been saying was I've got ten teams all vying to offer Colin Kaepernick a contract.

1 (13m 38s):
That's what's different guys, which many masks was different to before we would have been. Oh, well, you know, they gave Jay-Z a contract to do the entertainment which Jay-Z should not have taken which is not going to be a popular opinion. Okay, but we should have stood strong behind Colin Kaepernick and he's one of the greatest quarterbacks alive today still. Okay, right. No question about that and he still Sitting on the sidelines and you're going to act like you're so concerned plus 250 million dollars spent over a 10-year period is equivalent to the celebrations that they financed when they win the Super Bowl. That's no money for the NFL. Okay, again, you got to really follow the dollar.

1 (14m 20s):
It's almost as if those who do the worst in terms of diversity and opportunities of power within their corporation for people of color are the ones with the most sincere. These young people don't want to hear it and a whole bunch of us older folks. Don't either

2 (14m 36s):
which is why it's important to talk about it. Oh,

1 (14m 39s):
absolutely. Absolutely the dialogue I was so proud of the other night Jane Fonda in her 80s called out quite America. Okay. Now she certainly does not have the relationship with white America there. She once had when she was their number one box office attraction, but still she has a lot of power a lot of influence. I was so happy to hear her. Just hit it Square on so many are the when these corporations are all every corporation in America. We start getting emails and Communications from our staff said are you all going to issue a statement which my management team went ahead and did because we are a publicly held Corporation.

1 (15m 19s):
The reality is I live my statement every day. I don't need to apologize for anything. No, I didn't please everyone and I couldn't help everyone but I live it. I don't talk the talk. Try to walk the walk and I require that of my company. So I'm a little suspect with all these major corporations. And you know, you look at their boards. How many black members do they have on their boards? How many people of color black and brown or in decision-making positions within those corporations now or say, oh racism is so bad cool. Let's get past the apology stage. This send me some strategy. This is what I'm going to do and like I said 250 Fifty million dollars fit over 10 years is the cost of the Super Bowl party if they

2 (16m 6s):
win, right? So, I mean, I mean the arguments were hearing is like actions speak louder than words, right? It's take action, you know something you mentioned earlier in a conversation about entrepreneurship and this is the thing like how I built this is about as celebration of Entrepreneurship, but as you know, Kathy entrepreneurship in the United States has actually been declining over the last 30 years and it's been

1 (16m 31s):
Because of consolidation because of the big boxes because if you have major corporations buying out everybody and putting them all under one umbrella. It has been an incredible decline, but you know that we've lost almost a half a million black distances between February and April. It's like 480,000 black businesses have closed forever 90 days were talking about that's again when you go back to when we go back to your earlier question. That's why I'm afraid

2 (17m 2s):
the Wonder. I mean it's sort of a weird question to ask but I wonder whether you know kind of going back to this idea of being at the at the sort of the low point in our economy. And when you sort of given the conversations that we're having and the demonstrations that we're seeing around the country. I mean, do you do you think in some ways that they're that this could also be a moment for young black entrepreneurs or first-time black entrepreneurs to really break through like You were the Kathy Hues of 1981 and

1 (17m 34s):
1988 any time. There's a crisis there are opportunities because people become more creative. They become more congenial ingenious necessity is the mother of invention isn't oh, oh saying the reality is a lot of people are going to suffer during the next few years. I think not just months but a lot of people are going to have opportunities that would not have been available who are going to come up with very creative ingenious ideas and business ventures. They're going to make a difference. I'm excited for them. And so many of them are fearless because when you're young and you realize that you have an opportunity to do something that you only thought before was a vision or a dream but circumstances the situation allowed you the opportunity to do that the Excitement.

1 (18m 32s):
Oh, my goodness is almost unheralded ever before the opportunities that are going to come out of this in the medical field. If so, many different fields in technology one of the problems. I think with them, you know, a significant decrease in Black businesses is so many of us are in businesses that are classified as non essential and I think that some of those new businesses of the future are going to be ultra Central yeah,

2 (19m 3s):
well you were on the show almost four years ago and your company, you know is as influential as ever in terms of its its cultural impact and importance if you think about five years from now you think about Urban one you think about your influence you think about the conversations are convening? What is it that you want to take away from this time and really kind of apply to everything that you do.

1 (19m 28s):
Well number one. I think that It's all of us have been to come out with different business models. I think that the whole issue of expansive expensive office space. Okay, it's going to be an issue. It took us, you know a minute to get our rhythm going it took us a minute to really understand. How do you supervise everyone in their homes while they're busy trying to help their child home school and make certain that they live up to the responsibility of that paycheck. They're any but we are learning. I would hope my dream. My commitment would be that my company would be in a position to take that which we do now and multiply it a million times over to help that many more people.

1 (20m 17s):
I've always felt that my company's Mission had to be to be of service to my community being the first African-American woman of a publicly traded Corporation. I I hope that my Feud issue very responsibility is to say that the number one priority is supposed to be to add enhance shareholder value again what we're going through now, I don't have to say that. Okay today. I said it almost you know it memory of when I used to have to say that and I don't feel guilty about admitting that my whole purpose for being in business was to be a voice and an assistant to my community.

1 (20m 58s):
I wanted to provide assistance to the people. Ooh, listen to me or who now watch me on one of our two cable channels or interact and or a user on our internet companies. We've touched on a weekly basis 92% of all of Black America interacts with one branch of my company in one form or fashion. I want that to just continue to grow and multiply and I want to once again use those resources to build my community. I think still and I have had this opinion since it's very very young age that it is my responsibility to cure the ills to help figure out and strategize the path to Liberation and freedom for my people is my responsibility as a black entrepreneur to use my resources to help Finance.

1 (21m 53s):
The correction of the ills that have we have been plagued with I cannot do that unless the System is willing to literally take its knee off my neck again for people of color watching witnessing that murder. It was like Boeing it was like a slap. It was a light bulb going off. We realized that we have to look out for ourselves, but we cannot do that when there are institutions whose Prime purpose and being in life. The only reason the police. It exists was those were the bounty hunters those were the Vigilantes during the days of slavery who went and got two slaves.

1 (22m 37s):
Those were the overseers they evolved into police departments, but that's where they started they started patrolling and correcting the actions of blacks that they did not feel it was consistent with the best interests of white people and those institutions still have that number one goal. So that's not a problem. Only white people can solve the problem of institutional racism. The problem I can solve is providing for my people providing a education a skill to help them achieve their full potential financing the things that they need and want and are desirous of and not having to depend on anyone including the federal government to provide that for us.

1 (23m 25s):
That's a black responsibility to the black community.

2 (23m 30s):
Kathy Hughes just just incredible. It's so great to see you. Thank you for coming back. Do you promise when we have the had built the summit we can reconvene it when it's

3 (23m 40s):
safe. I couldn't get there.

1 (23m 43s):
I'm going to be there waiting on you all. I'm so sorry that I missed it. But also guy, thank you so much for the incredible work you and NPR do sharing easily digestible and palatable information about it's not that complicated the way you Present businesses to the general public so often you go and see or hear a speech or watch someone and you leave there thinking. Wow. I really don't understand what they said guy you and your team have an incredible talent for taking very complicated issues and simplifying them.

1 (24m 23s):
So that is put in a laban's language and everyone can understand and I thank you and salute you for that.

2 (24m 28s):
Well, we're very fortunate to have have guessed Like You Who Come on the show? So thank you Kathy and see you soon.

1 (24m 34s):
Thank you. God bless.

2 (24m 36s):
That's an excerpt for my conversation with Cathy Hughes the founder of urban one to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this just search for videos. And if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR It's dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney, Gianna, Kappa, Dona Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.