1 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor

3 (2s):
3M committed to finding solutions for problems big and small in ways that

1 (7s):
improve lives

3 (8s):
to learn how 3M is helping the world respond to covid-19. Go to 3 m.com covid 3M science applied to life.

1 (18s):
Hey everyone. So I have a request if you value this show if you value the stories the lessons the wisdom and inspiration we bring to you if you think of me. As your friend, which I am because even though millions of you are listening. I'm actually talking just to you right now. I need you to be there for me as well, and you can do that by supporting what I do and buying my book how I built this. It is just out now and available everywhere, and it doesn't cost more than a few cups of coffee, and it's filled with wisdom and stories and ideas that will have you feeling inspired and fired up to Take On The World.

1 (59s):
So please if you Of the show and what we do for you do us one back and pick up how I built this wherever books are

3 (1m 6s):
sold.

1 (1m 11s):
Hello everyone and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes. We talked with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're dealing with the challenges of the pandemic and the global economic crisis. And today. We're going to hear from Aisha Dozier the founder of bossy Cosmetics Aisha's company is pretty young. It's only been around for about 19 months and she describes bossy Cosmetics as a female empowerment company masquerading as a makeup company and before I should Started it. She was an investment banker. Tell me the story. I mean you were in finance. I know you grew up in Cambridge, Massachusetts and you study the Cornell and and you were in finance for like two decades.

1 (1m 55s):
How did you make the move to start your own thing?

3 (1m 58s):
So it's interesting. If I sort of go back it's important to mention, you know, I'm a first-generation American citizen my parents were or are Nigerian my father's passed away and after the war in Nigeria, they moved to the US. S to get college degrees both of them. I was born in the middle of that process and my parents got a divorce. They split my father went back to Nigeria and we lived in the u.s. Until I was 10 and then I moved back to Nigeria. Now when I went to Cornell, as you said I had I don't think I was passionate about Finance. I just knew that I needed to pay for my own education. Right? And I also knew that I needed to take up loans and get scholarships and grants Etc.

3 (2m 39s):
And so I left school with you know, quite heavy dead. And you know, you just very quickly make the mental calculation and realize Finance is where the money is. Right, right. So I think I fell into finance and also I was very good are talented at math and it was very very good at economics. And when I started at my first job was at Goldman in New York, I thought I would do it for my two years as an analyst that was it. And then I was offered a third-year analyst position I said, okay one year and I'll go to business school and I kept saying one more year one more year and you know as they say golden handcuffs. Yes more money. You keep getting higher and higher and that whole adrenaline goes and for me for years ago. I was super stressed out.

3 (3m 20s):
I have three children. I was traveling all over the world. I was very senior as an investment banker, but I wasn't healthy and when my doctor said listen, you're going to have a stroke if you keep going this way for me. It was a come to Jesus moment. And that was the beginning of the journey at the time. I didn't know that would start a Makeup Company because I had no makeup bag. Ground except for the fact that I was an avid user. Yeah a beauty products. So that's where it started from.

1 (3m 48s):
You know, it's so interesting because we talked about this on the show a lot this idea of doing things that are dangerous versus scary. And and when you have those golden handcuffs, it feels really scary to leave because you know, you've got this steady income and you're making lots of money and it's a secure job, but then the question is is it dangerous to stay because one day you might wake up and read That you didn't leap at the chance to do something on your own and it sounds like that's the calculation you made you you realize that it would be too dangerous to stay even though it was scary to leave.

3 (4m 22s):
Yeah, I mean I had a panic attack. I'll be honest with you when I was in the hospital in Lagos Nigeria, which is where I was living in my last roll and when I had decided, okay, I'm quitting. I'm not healthy and certainly not mentally happy doing this job, but I don't know what I want to do. Just the sheer fear. I was so petrified of loss. Of sadness loss of income, you know that that business card. Your identity is been so wrapped up in this thing. I thought I was having a heart attack turns out it was a panic attack and at that point, you know a hospital my husband and I looked at each other and it was just very clear that something needed to

1 (4m 56s):
change so really it took a lot of Courage for you to do this. So let's talk about makeup and cosmetics because you know, and and and people in the industry know this is a massive Global industry with huge growth potential. How did you decide to focus on Cosmetics on creating a Cosmetics brand

3 (5m 17s):
so when I left my job in banking I was thankfully accepted into a fellowship at Stanford. So that's how I came to Palo Alto which is where I live right now. I was part of a fellowship a one-year Fellowship called the distinguished Careers Institute and what I love about the DCI Fellowship is they take people who have established some level of success in their careers, but are looking for significance. And so I spent Year Stanford. Most of my time is in the design school, which is probably one of the most transformational years for me because the main thing I learned was you can actually do anything you want to do. You don't have to have all the information just give it a try, right? Yeah have an Insight go out there test it in the marketplace created prototype go out there engage with customers and they just go back keep reiterating and keep reiterating.

3 (6m 5s):
And so I was like, wait a minute. I don't have to have millions of dollars to create a massive company and then go into the A good place to learn I can just take little steps and little steps. And so that's three. The one Journey can literally be start really small and I immediately knew I wanted to do something with color and I wanted to do something with women. I have learned over the years that ambitious women who like myself climb the ladder often deal with issues around imposter syndrome deal with issues of lack of confidence, even though we don't show it but inside were Right. And so we started talking to women. How do you think about confidence? What do you do?

3 (6m 45s):
What do you do to get ready for this big meeting of promotion or job interview? And so many women talked about I get my hair done. I put on my makeup I put on my lipstick at that it dies it done. There was a connection between how you look how you feel and how you perform and that's where I was like, let's go I'm gonna start a beauty

1 (7m 2s):
company, you know, I've heard this before from other Founders who are involved in the beauty industry, which is it's incredibly empowering, you know, when somebody feels good about the The way they look right? I didn't invent this. I do my hair toss. Check my nails baby. How you feeling? Right? Yeah. So I mean Jan Heineman Rent the Runway. This is her whole point is that when when people feel when they look good when they feel good, they're more confident they're empowered and it actually enables women to feel powerful in the workplace and it sounds like so that's the that's the best sort of value proposition. You landed on

3 (7m 36s):
that's exactly the core of what bossy Cosmetics is and our mission. From day one. It's on our site is empowering women to look feel and do good. Like the do is action. It's about wanting women to go out and do more be more.

1 (7m 53s):
All right, so you land on this idea during this year. You have no background in cosmetics and makeup, but you know that you can start small. So how did you start to just start to really dive into the research and and start to really delve into this into this industry to learn as much as you could.

3 (8m 12s):
Absolutely. So the first thing I did I was still a student at the time. So the benefit of being a student at Stanford is you have access to your monitor reports and all these various fees research reports, you know, I just read and read and read and then the first the one of the most important things I learned was that the average woman wear something color on her lips on most occasions, but she is least loyal to the person who makes her lipstick like the average woman who wears makeup is very About the foundation she wears of the eyeliner or the mascara. Like she'll have one product that she's like this. Is this my one thing but for lipsticks, so I have 10, huh? And that's where I was like, you need to start a lips because I'm not a celebrity.

3 (8m 54s):
I'm not an influencer. Nobody knows who I am. But if that's the area which people are willing to try that that's where you need to go. So that's how I started with listings.

1 (9m 4s):
So when you decided to take the leap, did you go out and seek funding for the business?

3 (9m 11s):
I did. So first of all, I'll say that I wanted to start small. But of course, I live in Palo Alto and you kind of have this notion that wait a minute everybody who wants to start a business here just has checks written to them. Yeah, right. And so you're like, okay. Well if I want to start small I'll get somebody to write me a check and I go, you know trying to speak to venture capitalists. Of course, I do a bunch of blind emails and SMS several repeatedly. I'm not sure anybody responded to any of Them and everybody that I spoke to made me hate the idea.

1 (9m 46s):
They said don't do it.

3 (9m 48s):
Oh absolutely. A lot of people said to me men by the way, he said to me, what is the connection between work and Beauty the to have nothing to do with it each other. They're not wonder how I built this if they're saying that by the way, and that's the thing aside. It's a pointless to even continue a conversation when you're speaking to a potential investor doesn't even understand your industry or the one of the most offensive was. This is so nice. Shhhh, you know, this is only for black women, right and there was that sort of underlying unconscious or maybe conscious bias of because I'm black the only one I can really appeal to with my product and my marketing is another black woman, right? So it was this is too Niche or just some really silly things that that led me to okay just self-financed and I had a few friends who were like, hey, we want to support you and wrote me checks and I started on my own right so no institutional money, and I said, let's just start this and not having any issues.

3 (10m 41s):
She'll Capital next is super Scrappy makes you think about every cent you spend. What is the potential return on this is it useful? So it was a really interesting place to find myself, which is I really did think my God. I'm not sure I should be able to raise lots of money and then realizing that I can trace any and the thing that really excited me was when I spoke to women, they would all say to me. Oh my God, that's a great idea. How come nobody's doing that? Oh my God, that's cool. But you're going to offer free coaching services. Are you going to be money from that? Oh wait you're going to Interview women to talk about this and that's when I was like waiting like customer likes this. So let's just focus on the customer. And so that's that was the blessing in the rejections is that it forced me to focus on the ultimate

1 (11m 27s):
user when we come back in just a moment. I should tells me why it's kind of tricky to trademark the name bossy. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor 3M supporting communities in the fight against covid-19 since the outbreak 3M has responded with cash and product donations including surgical masks hand sanitizer and respirators through local and Global Aid Partners In addition 3M is on track to produce two billion respirators globally by the end of 2020.

1 (12m 9s):
Learn how 3M is helping the world respond to covid-19. Go to 3 m.com covid-19. 3M science applied to life and just one more thing the how I built this book is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with a ton of stories. You haven't heard and have some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book. Abel wherever you buy your books and please if you support what I do on the show, you can show that support by picking up how I built this the book and thanks.

1 (12m 60s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm talking with Aisha Dozier. She's the founder of bossy cosmetics and I shall says despite all the economic challenges. We're facing right now. It's still a pretty good time to start a business.

3 (13m 15s):
We have never had a lower barrier to entry to starting as an entrepreneur today, you know, it's free to set up an Instagram account. It's really easy to set up a bank account like all these things create a really tiny product range. You can even shoot the photography yourself if you want to In with an iPhone and just go out there and give it a try and I really do believe which is something we've been doing at bossy is you just keep getting better and better like you improve improve

1 (13m 42s):
improve. Yeah tell me about the name, but I mean, it's so great because it's so like in your face, but it's clearly tongue-in-cheek but also has a multiple meanings to tell me about the name was like why you pick those

3 (13m 56s):
there's a good and not separate part of the name. So when I had come To this. Okay. I'm going to start a beauty company. I thought what should I call it and literally bossy hit me in the face, right? And I thought I would I want to use the bossy as I want to it is the word for me that really encapsulated the kind of woman. I was trying to speak to and when I say self-identifies as ambitious she more than likely at least once in her entire life has been called bossy, and that was always and I definitely have to go boss. Multiple times in my life, right and what that meant was, you know, you have a few point and you want to make your point heard, you know, they don't say you're assertive or your natural leader.

3 (14m 40s):
And so I wanted to take this term that has historically been used in a very pejorative fashion for women and almost flip it on its head and say own this own. You're bossy. Let's retake this term and let's use it to empower ourselves that when someone calls you bossy. It means they heard your voice right because if you're a wilting flower, Or in the corner, no one's calling you bossy. Right but there's so many different bosses in the beauty industry now, I mean, you've got were bossy beauty or bossy Cosmetics. There's so many different versions be bossy bossy this policy that and so, you know, we are in the process of rebranding the company because it's impossible to get a trademark with the word bossy now.

3 (15m 21s):
Yes and I States because you know, there are at least 20 companies that use the word bossy. And of course being a former Banker I understand, you know ownership of It and so that is very critical for us. So it's a very interesting time for the business and growth perspective as well.

1 (15m 37s):
Can you call it like be a wsy just spelled differently,

3 (15m 42s):
you know, I'd love to do that. But I promise you somebody will find a reason to sue us that it is been a very interesting few months guy with people, you know believing that they own that word and you know, just my own personal search of you know in the last Last six months our business has

1 (16m 2s):
exploded. Yeah, tell us talk about that. I mean, I mean your new business so your soup. So you're an and you're in the midst of this economic and Global Health crisis. So what's been going on with the business so I can

3 (16m 14s):
see in January I start to get really nervous. And the reason is when we first started the business a hundred percent of our supply chain was in California, and then of course, there's we started to grow and I decided okay. Look this is actually going really well. I want to go to eyeliners eyeshadows all these Get into full color Cosmetics. I decided that I would diversify my supply chain. And so I went on this trip last summer with my product designer who's based in Paris. So we moved our formulation lab to Italy our primary packaging suppliers are in China and then our boxing packaging is a Germany. Well, March 8 was our first year birthday and on March 8th. I was going to be unveiling a whole new collection and then in January, my suppliers are like, yeah, we don't know we might have to close for just a a week or just two weeks and then it became February there was shut down.

3 (17m 4s):
I started to have panic I was like, okay, we need to get this out. Let's get that out and they are managed to get one container out to Italy and so I'm like, okay hasn't got our stuff is getting to Italy at least half of its getting to Italy if we rush but Marge we can launch some of them not all of them. And then as we all know Italy shut down. Yeah. So by my first anniversary March 8th, I had a good problem, which is that on watch collection had pretty much so Which is great, but I had nothing else to self. So there was like sold out sold out on the website, you know all my promises and announcements of look guys, you know, we have this coming out. We're just I had nothing to sell I was miserable and so that happened in March and then in April I sent an email out to our e-mail list of a few thousand people and said guys look I feel really bad lie that you haven't heard from me.

3 (17m 55s):
But you know, this is what I was finest, you know, I'm really sorry that everything. Thing is sold out on the site. I have nothing to sell you at this point on my California and suppliers also shut down. So there's nothing to sell and I'm like look, there's nothing to sell guys, but can we chat? Can we talk if anybody wants to talk about getting an MBA? I have an MBA, I'd love to give you advice about that. Anybody wants to talk about how to be a mom in these times. I love to talk about that in my customers started writing me back. I shall can you talk about this. Can you do this? Can you do and I do live on this topic. Can you do this you do that? And it became this whole Community discuss friend. Thank you. Did you tell him cat? Yeah, and so that just kept me busy and then June happened and I feel really weird guy talking about the death of George Floyd because I mean for the obvious reasons, you know, just a very broken period and a very sad period but what happened for black-owned businesses was it was almost like someone had switched the coding and the algorithm folks started looking for Quality black owned businesses and the Press started to really talk about us and then the people who just didn't even know about my business before did and luckily at that time.

3 (19m 13s):
Italy opened up again China had opened up again. And so I flew out an aircraft of some of our products that were made and I was like, but it all kind of Happened at a very interesting time. And so we're back in business and with this whole 15% pledge that's opened up a whole new thing for us as

1 (19m 36s):
well. This is the what Sephora and some of these Beauty retailers are saying 15% of the products. We sell will be will be bye. Bye black owned

3 (19m 43s):
businesses. Exactly. And so not only did you have consumers now looking for black and breads buying them then you have, you know major retailers. Who are emailing you you know, you look at your email box that you're like, huh? Like what me. Wow, they're like, yeah the to talk to you about getting in our store and you know, I started off this year. I think I did and I do live or I said by the end of 2020. I would love to be in five boutiques and I picked five cities then all of a sudden you have Global retailers emailing you saying, you know, some customers have suggested you let's talk so it's you know in March when I kind of fell on the floor like oh my God my business you have dead to today.

3 (20m 32s):
I can't believe it.

1 (20m 34s):
I mean it really is a reminder that in those low moments. Sometimes you just have to get through it. You just have to kind of persevere and the only way to get through it is just to get through it because around the corner something may happen that may completely change the situation.

3 (20m 56s):
A testament to that. I mean, I've literally in April thought the business is death, right? Like how do you have a product company that doesn't have products and doesn't know when it's going to have products and is this even a good use of your time? The world is falling apart is the world coming to an end. And now I get his point about resilience now Mike at this point around great. Yeah.

1 (21m 19s):
Do you want one one last question for you? Before we go, you know, this is such a crazy time. I'm your Still early on in building at your business and building the foundation of your business. But if you were starting out if you if somebody came to you and said, you know, I shh, I don't know. I mean it's now a good time to start a business like the world is crazy. Like what should I do? What would you answer? How do you how do you answer that question?

3 (21m 43s):
Look, I mean, it depends obviously on your circumstance, right? Because I think I am lucky that blessed that I have a home to live in and that you know, I can afford to take this type of risk. So they first of all people need to establish what kind of privilege they enjoy to allow themselves to not have a salary because you know, you don't pay yourself money when you're starting this business every cent goes back into the company. So once I'm assuming you've done that I think this is a really great time. There's their funds outside out there their grants, you know, looking for entrepreneurs to do really interesting things and these are really crazy times where people have needs people are spending money are are looking for support.

3 (22m 24s):
You just need to figure out what they want. And so this is the time if you think that you want to be an entrepreneur, this is the time to go for it. Asia Dozier

1 (22m 33s):
founder of bossy Cosmetics. Thank you so much for being on the show for joining us. Thank you. That's an excerpt from my conversation with eyeshadows a founder of bossy Cosmetics to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR and if you want to find out out more about the how I built this resilient series check out NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by JC Howard with help from will Mitchell Bruce Grant Matt Adams L. Mannion Gianna cappadonna, John Isabella, Julia Carney, never Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Farah Safari.

1 (23m 14s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I will be back in just a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.