2 (0s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs about how to think creatively during this really disruptive moment. And today I'm bringing you my conversation with Morgan Devon. The founder of blabbetty blabbetty is a media company with multiple verticals written by and for black Millennials Morgan started at six years ago after working in the tech industry, and we'll definitely talk about what spurred her to do it. But first, I just wanted to know how she She was doing it's been like what like two years since the pandemic started. How have you been doing? I

1 (37s):
think now I'm okay. I felt like I just went to war. I mean it was a very traumatic experience running a business and having to make some very tough decisions about people and business model and make a lot of pivots and still exude confidence leading a group of people to help manage their anxieties and fear of uncertainty and It during that pandemic that we're still very much in having the social unrest and really going into overdrive as a company and as a mission of who we serve while having limited resources because of covid so it's been very long a couple of months and I'm very proud of you know, what we've been able to accomplish despite kind of all the things going on.

1 (1m 24s):
But yeah, I feel a little bit tired guy.

2 (1m 27s):
Yeah. So for people watching you who may not know blabbetty is a News website. You've got all these different brands travel sites and Tech and you do conferences and politics sites and beauty and lifestyle verticals. Can you tell us a bit more about blabbetty?

1 (1m 44s):
Yeah. So Blobby Inc is a media company and platform. I started it when I was first in Silicon Valley and in text and mostly because I felt lonely and there is a lot of opportunity to kind of create more spaces for young black people in this country and I wanted us As a community to have our own brand where we could tell our own stories and share our own Heroes. And so we really try to Encompass the entire fullness of Blackness which includes not just news but also travel and food and music and art and culture and storytelling Shadow and act one of our Brands focuses on black Hollywood after textbook some black innovators and technologists and Venture funding.

1 (2m 27s):
So, we really try to make sure that the business is diversification. Versified and across the many different types of experiences within the black diaspora and our

2 (2m 36s):
space. I love this founding story of it don't want to just ask you about it because you were student at Washington University in st. Louis where he grew up and from what I understand like you used to have these really amazing like moveable Feast conversations with friends group of black students and you kind of I guess jokingly called the black gravity and then started calling it blabbetty and that was kind of the Genesis of this Media Company. How did you like come to the realization that I want to I want to do this? I want to take that spirit and that energy and I want to turn it into a media company.

1 (3m 9s):
Yeah, so there's this moment at the lunch table that I think a lot of people of color have this experience where you know, maybe you're not the majority at the school, but when it comes to the cafeteria, like you all have your moment I wash you it was the black table and blabbetty was a phrase that was just used in kind of passed down between the blacks. Students year over year and it was that emotional feeling of like, okay one person sits down and then 10 people sit down and then you having those conversations about class or proofreading each other's essays or what you guys did last night or you know, just really feeling of openness and belonging and even if you hadn't sat at the table for a few weeks, you know, people be like, where have you been, you know, it's always open arms.

1 (3m 54s):
I'm some tough conversations you can always agree but you learned a lot that was a place where I grew in my black-eyed. Entity and I challenged I got challenged about you know, what does it mean to be black my experience growing up in st. Louis isn't the same experience as someone who grew up as a first-generation second-generation Nigerian American and what does that look like or someone who went to an all black high school and what their experience and I went to an all-girls Catholic High School. Like what does that mean? And what I moved to Silicon Valley in Mountain View, which didn't really reflect st. Louis and black, you know, black diversity or anything I felt disconnected from my community and I was missing that sense in that feeling of warmth and so blabbetty was trying to bring that feeling back into our lives on a daily basis through content and connections and stories and making it easier for people to really stay and build relationships with each other through the internet

2 (4m 48s):
and to that point we're going to mean you know, there was Huffington Post and BuzzFeed and Vox and different companies that had verticals but it sounds like you know you were saying there's nothing that speaks to Black Millennials and Engines ears and that really was the sort of the Genesis and the catharsis behind kind of creating

1 (5m 5s):
this that's right. You know, there's certainly black Legacy Media organizations that I have so much respect for I know you had Kathy he's here they've done a fantastic job. I also think that there's new generation and we use technology differently. And how do we continue to have that connectivity that we used to have with the radio or with local newspapers that were printed online? And what does it look like to have a Ruth's house in a brand that people trust to help bring people together. And so that's what gravity's core mission is.

2 (5m 35s):
Yeah. I mean you you launch this business. I think you were you were just 24 years old takes a lot of Courage for any 24 year old to launch a business. Was there a moment of the sort of a catalyst where you were like I got to do this because you have this incredible sort of horizon in the tech sector you had this job at into it and probably the sky was the limit but what was the thing that gave you the courage to say? No, I'm gonna give all that security up. Going to take a risk and do

1 (6m 1s):
this. Well, you know, I was feeling frustrated. I felt like working in Tech. I loved learning about the Innovation and the process of the mindset of Silicon Valley. I think it is Limitless in terms and it's so contagious to be around people who talk about making billion dollar companies and building a technology platform that billions of users is going are going to use and changing people's lives. You know, that is so cool, and I would didn't grow up around Matt. The Midwest and so I love Silicon Valley for that and what it gave me. I also felt like as a young black woman working at a tech company. I also felt constrained. I felt like I had to I was transitioning my hair at the time and two natural hair and I just felt like I was constantly tiptoeing being polite not wanting to be too aggressive but also being like I'm smart I have things to say I think to contribute so I was wearing an extra layer that was draining my energy every day when I went To work on all I wanted to do was build and create and be a part of this ecosystem and then at the same time I was sitting in San Francisco and I was watching my city burn when my frown happened and I was watching the discrepancy between the news and mainstream news media and the coverage and what was happening on the ground Ferguson and in Ferguson, right, which is you know, right outside of the city of st.

1 (7m 24s):
Louis is slightly North so that felt I felt helpless and so I wanted to use my skills and the access of the information that I that I had been learning through Silicon Valley or maybe naively you having only been there for two years. But here we are nonetheless and I quit, you know, I quit my job and I've worked on blabbity full time. We had already launched a version of it over the summer, but I really at that point, you know, quit my job and the fall right after my crown

2 (7m 52s):
- I have to imagine that like a lot of media companies you're in this kind of weird situation now because you probably are getting A lot of traffic to your site, right? There's a lot of interest people are shut in there. They want information. They're looking at media organizations on at the same time. Like we are in this economic crisis like we are also suffering economically. So has that been your situation where on the one hand you're like your numbers are record highs but the business side is is hurting right now.

1 (8m 23s):
Yeah, you know, one of the things I am incredibly grateful for is the new attention on stories and conversations that we've been having since the founding of Gravity by we cover these stories of police brutality and death and murder. That's why we were created. You know, that was the final straw that I was like we got to do something anything we got to do something and why not me and I think a lot of us right now are also asking that question. It's like how to do something and why not me and that is beautiful to see and in fact, that's what we've been waiting for. And so many ways is this moment we've been writing these stories to deaf ears for so many So I think our tutorial on our new scene feels energized but also that it's mentally draining to your point to work in an environment where people are understaffed or under resource.

1 (9m 11s):
And we're at that exacerbated by the economic toll and secondarily for us as a black Media Company people are very sensitive about running ads or campaigns against black desk or murder or social justice because that's not always add space or add friendly so I find myself constantly. Constantly at this tension of running a business that's for profit with investors. I've raised you know over 11 million dollars have fantastic investors that support the mission but it is a for-profit entity and managing an honoring that people the humans that I'm responsible for. We've had to do layoffs that have been very difficult. We did salary reductions all the things that many other media companies have done we've had to go through as well.

1 (9m 55s):
And so how do I reconcile that? You know, it's very

2 (9m 58s):
difficult. Yeah. I mean, it's really harder. I saw that because you're as I say, I mean you're getting record traffic probably more traffic than you've ever had ever. And at the same time, you know, you're kind of forced to to make some of these hard decisions Morgan. I read this such a cool story. When you were a kid, you used to take Kool-Aid and make your own fun dip and sell it to other kids and you'd go to Costco and sell candy and like you were an entrepreneur from by the way. I loved fun dip. I didn't even know it's still around. I

1 (10m 30s):
don't know if it is

2 (10m 34s):
a Koolaid fun dip and so you were doing entrepreneurial things from a time. You were a little girl. Did you always want to do that? Did you always think I'm going to start a business one day

1 (10m 44s):
now, I didn't know name for it. I don't even think when I really started gravity. I was like, I'm an entrepreneur like I just have always been someone who's like that rule doesn't make any sense. The reason I did the fund different with to Costco's because the city made some sort of rule where there was no candy in the vending machines as if that was going Prevent kids from having candy. I was like, well, that's a stupid rule. Is it illegal for me to sell candy to each other right now? Okay, great. I've just always challenge the rules and ask the question will look like flip black, you know, and like what is this really solving for and I've also, you know always tried to bring people along with me, you know, and whatever Journey it is for good or bad and I also was the girl who got suspended for redistributing candy in that same school.

1 (11m 28s):
So, you know, it's Sometimes that I haven't always gotten the upside of the win

2 (11m 34s):
when we come back in just a moment. We'll hear Morgan's best advice for entrepreneurs looking to raise venture capital. And also what she wishes she knew when she started blabbetty stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition.

2 (12m 15s):
And my guest today is Morgan to bond the founder of blabbetty. She's one of these people who can juggle a million things at the same time when she's not running her company. She's giving other entrepreneurs advice about how to get their ideas off the ground. We're getting a bunch of questions in about entrepreneurship. And I know you do a lot of mentoring which I want to talk to you about in a sec, but I want to get to this question from Catherine Tugboat Willy she writes. I'm the founder of black parent magazine. It's a media. Money created by black parents for black mixed Foster adopted lgbtq parents of black children and she asks, how how do I raise money for my platform? Like she says she needs more staff more resources.

2 (12m 56s):
Do you have any advice or suggestions for ways that she can think about bringing in some some more financial resources to build up her company?

1 (13m 4s):
Yeah. So, you know raising money in Venture funding getting major funding is very difficult and it's something that I think think increasingly become more and more accessible to the black community. And so I really encourage people to consider it make sure that it's something that makes sense for your business. Also Venture funding isn't for every business model, right, you know, you have to very much be on a mission to build a hundred million dollar plus business and be able to get to 40 50 million dollars in Revenue plus right? I think that sometimes people may look at gravity and say what the media company that's raised Venture funding and it's Really more of a company that raise Venture funding because we have a huge audience and we're building products Brands experiences for that audience.

1 (13m 52s):
One of which is media and I think media loan as an industry is very difficult to get Venture funding for we've seen so many media companies go out of business. Now, I say all that to answer her question directly focus on your business model figure out how you can scale without Venture funding and focus on Revenue because typically having Revenue now that it is a little bit easier to get Venture funding people are going to look for a little bit more traction. So they're going to want to see that you have proven out that you can scale your audience or you've proven out that you can scale out your Revenue. So focus on those two things first, and then there is a lot of there's a lot of programs founder Jim is one of them. I know y combinator has different program already specific programs for minority entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs in general who want to learn how more about Venture funding so definitely check those out

2 (14m 41s):
when you At you know, young college graduates coming up to you and saying Morgan. I want to be like you want to be an entrepreneur. I want to jump into this and what is it that you wish you knew three four five years ago that you now know that would have made it may be just a little bit easier when you start it

1 (14m 58s):
so many things guys. I didn't know anything. I mean, I didn't know the vocabulary. I didn't know any of the acronyms and I think that's okay. I actually don't think you need to know all that stuff to get started, but I think that I I would have wanted to maybe understand fully The Venture funding model. Now when you take Venture funding the only way people get their money back if you exit that's a very tough thing that I have to struggle with because that means that we are selling it to someone else and if there's a constant push and drive towards that Milestone and not necessarily wasn't the Milestone that I set out to create for. I think I would have thought about that a little bit more and maybe change the business a little bit earlier.

1 (15m 40s):
I know they always say well don't worry about the out. Come on who you're going to sell it to you when you first raising money, I think it's important to think through those things

2 (15m 45s):
actually and obviously, I mean another option could be to go public like Kathy use you just mentioned Urban one is a public company, but they're obviously they're all kinds of trade-offs because as you say your investors aren't giving you money because they're nice. They're giving you money because they want to return one day.

1 (15m 59s):
That's right. And I've yeah, I mean more kudos to Kathy for being a public company, but wow the scrutiny the personal scrutiny of many board of directors and public CEOs. Tanya

2 (16m 12s):
Lee Morgan you running a media company that Not only was coping with the pandemic and then an economic crisis, but also a huge social justice crisis and and Reawakening the most profound important protest movement in the United States in at least 50 years. How is your team kind of just dealing with that emotionally and and how are you dealing with that? How have you been dealing with that emotionally?

1 (16m 37s):
Yeah, so, you know the week of First it was a mod. And then it was Brianna and then it was George. So we had a town hall that Friday and I mean, I'll be honest with you. I broke down in tears. He knows as soon as I saw their faces on that Zoom, you know and my co-founders so grateful for them Aaron and Jeff were able to carry the meeting because it's very heavy. So I think you know everyone is doing his best but it's

2 (17m 6s):
hard. Yeah and and doubly hard because I mean because cuz of what you're trying to do and and and what you're trying to say and and we're trying to reach this is a question from Monica Rojas. She asks, how do you and I think Monica's asking on her own behalf. How do you reach black communities throughout the nation and not just in your city or your region or in your local area? Do you have any suggestions or advice for Monica?

1 (17m 35s):
That's a great question that you know, I think that the internet is a beautiful place. I mean you're just so hot. Away from reaching a lot of people so understanding how sub-communities group together on Twitter or Reddit or Instagram even within Facebook groups. That's something that we've used to accelerate. Our growth is actually really focusing on the niche communities within our community because we found that the shares and the morality is much higher when you're actually using down even further. So think about the kind of the core demographics and also look at the data, you know, we spent a ton of time looking at our Google Analytics. Understanding our audience and our super users and understanding what they want and what they want to share and I think that has given us more clarity about the kinds of things.

1 (18m 19s):
We need to continue to do to ground

2 (18m 20s):
Morgan. I don't know how you do all these things because you got all these verticals and then you also have something called the work smart program. This is a program that you you do to help entrepreneurs of color in entrepreneurship in the United States in general extra has been declining since the 1980s and really acutely in communities of color so through the work that you're doing. How do you sort of see a path forward like a like a Resurgence in Black entrepreneurship in America in 10 years from now? Like do you see a path to that?

1 (18m 51s):
Yeah, you know, I started my work smart program because I was getting so many questions from entrepreneurs and I personally could not one-to-one advise everyone and a lot of the questions were the same questions. I'm so I do these group calls and master classes where now I can get hundreds of people and we can you know all talk at the same time. So it brings me a lot. Lot of joy and a lot of hope I think in terms of helping also to small business owners, which I think are a bit different than startup Founders. So small business owners, which really are the backbone of our economy. And so many ways often times don't have the resources the tools and the access to information on how to use very simple things like Google analytics or SEO or a sauna for project management or upward for hiring contractors.

1 (19m 35s):
So I try to just teach them the things that I've learned and used in my business to help me scale and grow so that You can kind of skip a few steps My Hope Is that the impact is actually greater for them because they're they're going from one employee to five employees, right? So that's really what I focus on. I actually relatively hopeful on the Venture and the Silicon Valley side. There's never been a better time to raise a million to five million dollars. It's a black founder in this country. You know, it took me a lot of NOS to get $500,000 for gravity and I had a million users at the time if I'm going out too. Today with that I would raise 5 million because there's more Venture funds folks from minorities and women of color.

1 (20m 17s):
There are more minority-owned Venture funds which is also super critical that have raised between 10 and 50 million dollars in funding which is that seed stage. And so I think it's a great time to consider Venture if that's something that's right for your business and then for small business owners, I am worried. I'm very worried because I think people may have been able to survive covid but maybe aren't able to survive. Secondary closed down. They don't have the access to Capital from Banks. So where do you float? You can't float from your family necessarily. We know the wealth Gap in America is atrocious. So what happens that worries me, so I think financing for small businesses small business owners is something we need to focus on.

1 (21m 0s):
I know it's very sexy to finances black startup founder, but like let's also do the small business owners.

2 (21m 6s):
I want to ask you about your your business model and this is a also Question from David Davidson on Facebook which is how are you able to continue to generate cash flow? Especially now during the during this economic crisis.

1 (21m 19s):
Yeah, so blabbetty. We've always had a diversified business because I did not want to be dependent on Venture funding. So we've prioritized Revenue at our core in terms of operating because it was important that we had multiple Industries and multiple revenue streams. So one of the things that we've learned, is that our Enterprise clients, And advertising agencies that work with us. They tend to want actually to go deep with our audience and our community. So they buy bundles they'll buy Integrations across multiple platforms. So thinking about you know, okay. Well, let's do a sponsorship here display ads over here a branded video series over here and an influencer campaign on social media.

1 (21m 60s):
And so that's allowed us to kind of weather the storm because as one thing goes up something else goes down and someone with Industries there are some industries that are ripping up their scent right the audio Astri, the Food Services industry. So also having a diversity of clients has helped us travel clients. Our transportation clients not doing so well, but in other places they're spending more money than they did before covid.

2 (22m 24s):
I do want to ask you one more question. This is from Walter triplet from Facebook as a sec. I have this question to which is in five years from now. What do you want to take away from this moment that that you actually bring with you? You know the way this moment has changed your leadership and your outlook. What are those things you want to take with you to the future? I

1 (22m 44s):
think for me as a leader to listen more. I mean, I'm always learning and I'm always growing so just continuing to challenge my own assumptions about what leadership can look like and also being a little less apologetic about some of the things that we've been able to accomplish, you know, I think we've been able to do a lot with a little and I'm very proud of the work that my team that's accomplished and what we've been able to build together. So figuring out how we can continue to bring others along the way is something that's really important to me. And what does it look like for our employees to continue to grow? What does it look like for our community to continue to grow and develop the future is very bright despite how dark some of the stories may be in the country.

1 (23m 26s):
I am very hopeful that this is a moment in time where people can be more reflective and grow as individuals and as humans,

2 (23m 35s):
we're going to bond co-founder of levity. Thank you so much for joining us.

1 (23m 39s):
Thanks for having me.

2 (23m 40s):
That's an For my conversation with Morgan debaun the founder of blabbetty to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this just click on videos. And if you want to see all of our past live video interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John. Bella Julia Carney Gianna, Kappa, Dona Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I will see you in a few days. I'm Gyros and even listening to how I built this from NPR.