3 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more. Hey, it's guy here. So have you ever thought about starting a business? And if so, what would it be? How do you come up with an idea? How do you find the money to start? How do you get the word out about your product or service? What do you do if Your idea isn't working and how do you pivot well to answer those questions. I've written a book. It's called what else how I built this and it's full of inspiring stories from some of the greatest leaders and entrepreneurs in the world who've been through the trenches made big mistakes and live to tell the tale if you're looking to start something or just want to be inspired by those who have built incredible things pick up how I built this now wherever you buy your books or by visiting gyro.

3 (1m 0s):
Dot-com and thanks. Hello everyone and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how their meeting today's challenges with new and exciting ideas. And today. We're going to hear from Bert and John Jacobs are the brothers and co-founders behind the brand Life Is Good Life Is Good is an apparel company based out of Boston that made over a hundred million dollars in Revenue last year, but the brothers have spent most of this year. During out how to sell their products because half of their business comes from selling to retail stores, which have been closed since March.

3 (1m 45s):
I spoke with Bert and John from their offices where they're holding down the fort and looking at e-commerce to make up for some of the missing sales guys. Both of you just to be clear you're both in your office right now in the

1 (1m 57s):
Boston area. That's right. We're in different sections of the office. We each have our own Wing right now to be safe. Have you been able to see

3 (2m 4s):
each other? I mean your business partners, but also brother Uh, so, you know able to see each other

2 (2m 7s):
a little bit but not enough on the other hand. We spent the first 18 years of our life in the same. Tiny roll are so

1 (2m 14s):
maybe it's okay to have a wall That's Not Fair John. That's not I really do want to see you. I love you and I want to see you likewise are what we're trying to be safe. We have seen each other when some really important family things were going on, but we're trying to be safe. And you know, I don't think any of us quite know exactly what we're dealing with yet. So we're being pretty strict about things.

3 (2m 34s):
Let's start with your covid response in I mean as you your Massachusetts Massachusetts really took this very seriously. Once this really became clear that this was a serious thing. How did you respond? I mean presumably you told your employees don't come in right?

1 (2m 50s):
That's correct. We close down the office and in Boston, we have two locations Boston and Southern New Hampshire and Southern doosan Hampshire's more of a kind of the muscle of the business. It's our distribution center, and we do some finishing systems there etcetera. There are some other departments like finance that are up there. But Boston we immediately closed down because we are operating in a building where there's other companies and Brands so we didn't think that was a safe environment. You know, you asked what did we first do we first met on zoom and discussed what to do and it was pretty Grim like many companies. So our business is structured in a way where half of our business was wholesale and that means the high majority of those Retailers close their doors canceled their orders and our business was pretty close to being decimated.

1 (3m 43s):
So we were having discussions candidly about bankruptcy and about laying off at least half of our staff. Thankfully then we had one evening where we kind of discussed the old analogy Sports analogy where sports fans about how the best defense is offense and we looked at strategies that we've been trying to develop and a really Central one is that we've been trying to move. What is 8 12 to 18 months supply chain window into a couple of days and we've invested in technology and we've been taking baby steps in that direction. So we decided as a group that we would really try to jump into this and see if it could save our business and we put a plan together which essentially was to make New Hampshire or Distribution Center extremely safe.

1 (4m 31s):
So setting up stations that are 10 feet apart at

2 (4m 33s):
cetera in house nurse thermal scan. Incredible protocol set up by our team there and I just want to give a nod to our leadership team that helped guide us to the decision birds talking about to stay open because initially like a lot of businesses if there's any risk to the team's Health, we got to shut down. They're the ones who said actually a lot of these people will be safer warehouse workers if they have a safe place that's being really strict to go to rather than picking up jobs in a supermarket in one with Uber

1 (5m 5s):
Etc other warehouses that And safe and it turned out to be

2 (5m 8s):
spot-on. So anyway,

1 (5m 10s):
what happened was we started designing t-shirts speaking directly to what was happening so t-shirts that said stay calm stay cool. Stay home. We began celebrating support systems which are really key to get through these times. So that's other people that you're quarantining with. That's your pets your dog your cat whatever it is. And so we made up the name corn teammate and We had a whole celebration of corn teammates and all the different dog breeds Etc. And you know a lot of silly fun, but a lot of serious underlying messages about being good to each other and kindness, you know the idea from the beginning not just with covid.

1 (5m 53s):
But what we were trying to do is maintain the company's value system, but change the business model the tail was wagging the dog where the wholesale business and this at long supply chain window was kind of ruling our Company and we already knew that that was an archaic model all of America retail operates on it by and large. We knew that consumers want things closer to Market want greater choice at cetera and we were trying to migrate in that direction, but we were experiencing a lot of resistance from retailers sales reps our own staff Etc and this forced our hand and it has shown us that the relationship between the consumers and the brand is so strong.

1 (6m 36s):
Wrong and the appetite is there for consumers and I think in particular in these really difficult times. We also learned how much people need optimism need uplifting

3 (6m 47s):
messages and when you talk about sort of dig into the supply chain for a moment, I mean what you're saying is traditionally you are producing a lot of material and then wholesaling it 12-18 months in advance to these different retail locations.

1 (7m 2s):
Well you design you design it that far in advance. You don't actually ship it that far. But really the whole system operates where retail buyers and our team are trying to have a crystal ball and see what consumers want a year from now and then you go off to trade shows and try to sell it. This is the way retail has been forever, but it's not in keeping with today's consumer demand.

3 (7m 24s):
So when you decided that you had to play offense as you say and you mentioned investing in some technology, what was the technology you invested in that enabled you to respond to Consumer demand

1 (7m 36s):
faster? Sure, it's called direct-to-garment printing we've been researching for the better part of five years and we just before covid hit spent several million dollars on technology to dumb it down or simplify. It means that we would take blank t-shirts in and print every order every single order. If you order one medium v-neck t-shirt with such and such graphic and message we print that to order and ship it to you. So it essentially is more expensive to print per In it, but if we're doing it, right you end up with perfect inventory and inventory is the thing that kills businesses,

3 (8m 12s):
right? Because if you get too much then you're kind of weighed down with all this stuff.

1 (8m 16s):
So we're not we're not committed right now day by day we watch exactly what consumers are buying how they're reacting and we make more of that product and if something that we put together is not selling we don't produce it.

3 (8m 27s):
So here's a question. I mean you're facing worries about whether you're going to go bankrupt in March and your leadership team is saying look we should actually play offense and invest in new technology that will enable us to respond to Consumer demand faster make t-shirts with these messages about washing your hands and staying safe and you know that are connected to the Zeitgeist that must have been expensive Machinery to invest

1 (8m 51s):
in. Yeah. We were pretty confident pre covid that this is the direction we should go with our brand, you know, we're not a necessarily fashion-forward company. We're high quality Basics and we're also not an athletic apparel company. That's Really focused on technical performance Fabrics John happens to be wearing a technical performance

2 (9m 12s):
Fabrics just for a leet athletes guy. Just the very tip

1 (9m 16s):
you're sure you right now the life is good one you were in yes, why isn't exact

3 (9m 19s):
if you must be working out because I can see it in that shirt. And

1 (9m 23s):
actually they you need some more up there Johnny. I think I'm actually really excited about this

2 (9m 28s):
but parts right

1 (9m 29s):
primarily like a point is that what drives our business is the art and the message so we happen to be in the apparel business primarily. Really t-shirts, but it's really not about the T-shirt the thing that drives our business. Our point of difference is seeing the world through an optimistic lens and sharing those ideas how an optimist views the world. That's how our community is emotionally

3 (9m 53s):
connected. I want to talk about that in a moment, but it sounds like you really wanted to move into this direction earlier like you want it to move into a direction where you could respond to Consumer demand faster and not focus on a 12 to 18-month lead time. T-shirt designs and that in some ways or maybe in every way the covid crisis kind of was your opportunity to do that

2 (10m 14s):
fast-forwarded

1 (10m 15s):
everything. Yeah. It's almost you know, it's hard. Like I think we have to recognize the difficulties that people are going through and the businesses and industries that have been decimated and not make light of that at all, but we're one of those fortunate businesses were covid did us a favor. It really moved us along. I think our staff as John pointed I'll have been very courageous and they've hustled their asses off and people have been working hard at life is good. So I don't want to make it seem like it's easy either. We work many of us around the clock for you know, the first 60 days just to figure out how to switch this model. But the fact is were we were in a good position as a brand we were in a good position to do this and we were able to replace so much of that wholesale business with our e-commerce.

1 (11m 3s):
Our e-commerce business has doubled to date over last Here in such a difficult macroeconomic environment and the wholesale business, you know went down to next to nothing, but it's starting to rise again. Yeah, I just

2 (11m 18s):
when I think of why we've been able to power through this not only this time but the recession around 08009 or even really rough times in general like like 9/11. We did a fundraiser after that and it kind of rallied our community but the point I want to make two young entrepreneurs is Is if your foundation is based on some deeper purpose our mission is to spread the power of optimism. We're so lucky to have that and these 10 values we call the life is good superpowers things like gratitude. That is so huge right now. We're hearing it from our customers. They're grateful for the extra time. They have with their family with the lack of commute that they're focusing more on their health on cooking on being together.

2 (12m 2s):
We hear this from our employees that they're grateful that they Don't have the commute and are having a little more time to put the kids to bed etcetera. But we're fortunate that the foundation of our company is something we believe is timeless and powerful and that is optimism. And if you're simply selling a widget right now and you run into a storm like this, it's much harder to evolve our first talking about the nuts and bolts that we had to adjust but the the foundational values are rock solid and when I say that word it could sound corny to some people but the values in a lot of companies. I feel like is a Dusty couple sheets of paper that's tucked away our superpowers or something.

2 (12m 44s):
We talk about daily our employees and body these values gratitude love authenticity creativity and we live for these things and we live for spreading them out to the world. So we feel like we're in a unique position to help people out there that are feeling

3 (12m 60s):
isolated when we come back in just a moment Bert and John talk about gratitude and how their company has been. Bull to find some optimism during these very difficult times stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor 3M who's using science and Innovation to help the world respond. Covid-19. 3M is on track to produce two billion respirators globally by the end of 2020 in addition 3 m is also maximize production of other Solutions, including biopharma filtration hand sanitizers and disinfectants.

3 (13m 42s):
Learn more at three m.com. Covid 3M science applied.

2 (13m 48s):
life

3 (13m 54s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm talking with Bert and John Jacobs of life is good about their ability to stay optimistic. Especially during these pretty bleak times. I'll be honest how I built. This is an optimistic show by its nature. I'm an optimistic person I try to be but that's not the full story. The reality is that there are days where feels like I'm pushing a boulder up a hill, especially these past six months. I'm in California. Now this state is on.

1 (14m 23s):
Fire

3 (14m 24s):
and we can't go outside because it's unhealthy to breathe the air and it feels to very challenging. So you add that to the pandemic and to the political crisis in this country and the racial Injustice and all of the things that are happening and it is a very very challenging time. Even the most optimistic people are seeing challenges in this moment and you're right about gratitude, you know something actually I tried to practice daily to remind myself of the That I have my children and my wife but man it's hard. Sometimes I'd be lying to you guys or to our listeners. If I said that I'm sunny and optimistic all the time because it's

1 (15m 3s):
Hardware. We're not we're not either life isn't perfect and life isn't easy. That's what our brand is about. It's more that it can be helpful. And we believe that it's the most powerful tool. We have as human beings to be rational Optimist to look through an optimistic lens. That doesn't mean you have this Pie in the Sky idea that Everything's perfect and everything's easy. But in the history of our business life is good in 26 years, the inflection points where our business has thrived the most we've steadily grown and had a healthy business, but I'll go through them really quickly 2001 911 believe it or not in the wake of that awful disaster our business grew it grew tremendously.

1 (15m 46s):
Okay, so people were seeking optimism and seeking unity and seeking uplifting messages when the recession in hit 2008-2009 our business thrived in the wake of that the bombings in our hometown the marathon bombings awful absolutely awful and we were impacted personally from that and we found ways with our business to really grow and now with covid in these challenges we have found that people are really really seeking optimistic messages and uplifting messages and it's not actually the soft stuff. It's very difficult. Right now to get by emotionally and mentally to sort of get ourselves in a place where we're prepared to try to have a good day.

1 (16m 32s):
There's a lot of mystery to what's happening. So having Unity with each other sharing and counting on our support system family of mentioned pets earlier, really really big we've celebrated science the importance of Science and hopefully finding a vaccine with made comments about just about everything sports fans. Are struggling right now that may sound like a frivolous simple thing. But we've had a lot of fun with when baseball season, you know was delayed. We made a t-shirt that said longest rain delay in history and that shirt selling hundreds of units every single day people miss it. Those things are small things are the big

2 (17m 11s):
things and bend guy your point about how you're feeling. I think everyone who's got a conscience and a heart is struggling with that balance right now, and we're not trying to plow that aside and say everything's fine. This is a really brutal year in so many ways for so many people. I wanted to share that the inspiration for us. It's been really a co-writing of the life is good story by our community and early on we started getting letters and emails from people they were often from people going through really difficult things dealing with chemotherapy losing loved ones and they would say your hat help me stay positive during chemo or you know, we all wore life is good to the memorial service.

2 (17m 53s):
and we brought up 9/11 a few times because it happens to be 911 today and one of our most inspirational letters we ever got was from a woman named Nancy who lost her husband Danny As A Firefighter in New York and this is her courage to focus on positive things, but she felt this emotional bond with our company because they always used to buy it on Christmas and now it was a way to kind of give a piece of Danny and keep his memory alive every Christmas, but the Few years it never stops. In fact, it keeps growing the stories that get us you mentioned the fires in California. We got one fairly recently from a woman who lost her whole house in a fire and a picture of her holding a half of a life is good mug saying and it's not about the thing.

2 (18m 41s):
It's about her mindset of I'm grateful that I'm alive. Like you said about your kids. We're all feeling this these mixes of emotions and they're expressing gratitude as like this big. Part of their toolkit like okay, I've lost this and this and I'm worried about everyone's Health. However, I'm alive and I have people that love me and I just had a meal and focusing on those things is very Central to our brand is and it's very much a two-way street. It's not life is good putting out these platitudes. It's even more so our community sharing their stories with us their pictures their messages their photos lifting us and really we're kind of a conduit.

2 (19m 22s):
We have quite a few Early online and they're lifting each other constantly and we enjoy that energy to from them but it's a true sense of

3 (19m 32s):
community. I remember when you guys were on the podcast last year and you guys really talked candidly about your upbringing your childhood and it was not easy your dad got in a car accident and it really embittered him and he had a tough life and you talked a lot about that and about how your mom really kind of focused on optimism, even though you guys were poor they were what eight kids I think in your house. And and and there was very little money and you know, you guys struggled for many years to get this business up and running. How do you how do both of you kind of find the motivation and the resilience to get up and keep going and keep moving even on those those tough days. I mean, you know, I will tell you that for me I have to do certain things every day.

3 (20m 16s):
I have to exercise in the morning. It's sometimes hard this morning was really hard. I didn't want to do it because I'm sad, but I'm glad Did it was hard and makes a day of just a tiny bit more

2 (20m 27s):
manageable. You know, what why you did that you did it probably because it works and we saw it work for our mother who didn't have an easy life at all. But somehow she found it in herself to sing to tell stories to draw and to encourage us to draw and that was huge and I don't think we quite realized it too. We were moving out of the house like what an influence how she changed the energy in the house with her own will and so exercise is a big one for myself. I know for Burt to and trying to stay connected the people I really love is extremely helpful. And I think people get momentum when they see that it is effective and that's why Burton died and the team are so passionate about getting the word out to more people because it actually works and we think it's the most powerful thing in the world.

2 (21m 20s):
Is that choice of

3 (21m 21s):
optimism and a choice that you can make Can choose to be happy? It doesn't mean he's and it's

2 (21m 26s):
harder for some and it's brutal on some days as you pointed out, but it's the most powerful thing. We

1 (21m 31s):
found part of the key I think is to seek the things that are good coping mechanisms that are healthy coping mechanisms, you know, drugs and alcohol Etc in excess is not a healthy coping mechanism people who truly love you and being in touch with them and communicating that's a support system that is part of a coping mechanism. That's really powerful exercise. Sighs is a healthy coping mechanism. So I think we had examples in our own household our mom and dad were both really good people and they both had pretty heavy challenges in their lives are mom, you know who sort of the hero of the story she suffered with depression her whole life even while we were growing up she suffered with it, but her coping mechanisms as John pointed out were singing storytelling dancing.

1 (22m 18s):
She taught us the idea of rational optimism. Let's focus on the good things. Focus on what's hap tell me something good that happened today, you know later we credited her. You know, we said wow, that was such great parenting mom. It was so powerful what you did and she I remember she just said I was doing it for myself. I think that's the biggest thing is to try to try to seek things that are helpful to you and try to avoid things that are damaging.

3 (22m 43s):
What is the difference between, you know, irrational optimism and rational

1 (22m 48s):
optimism irrational optimism says life is great every single day no matter Matter what everything's great either as far as fires going. There's a global pandemic. But today's just a perfect day that you're out to lunch. If you believe that we say rational optimism because we recognize that life isn't easy in life isn't perfect that there's real challenges. These are real difficult things that are going on, but we believe that the best most powerful tool we have for overcoming challenges is our disposition our view because Optimus tend to be Innovative, they tend to find Solutions, you know is the business show, right?

1 (23m 29s):
So we're talking about how to get through this difficult time. It's about adaptation. We listened closely to our customers. It's a dialogue and anybody listening you have a business, you know, the world's changing you can't have the same business. We have to adapt and then our own personal lives in order to fight off a heavy sadness and depression and becoming Paralyzed by all of this. We have to adapt you know, and and we have to find healthy coping mechanisms

2 (23m 58s):
creativity is one of those super powers I mentioned and you think maybe of our artists and our writers who've done a phenomenal job during this period but you can look at our operations team who's dealing with this new model that Bert just described and way more skews way more choices for the end consumer on the back end. That's a lot of puzzles to solve. The attitude of our Ops team has been bring it on. We'll figure it out. We love What we do that's something you can't really you can't really teach and it's part of that adaptive mindset and I just want to credit our team because Bert and I get to do interviews like this, but our team those are the people that have figured out these puzzles at the highest level to mid-level and they just power through and they've been so collaborative with each other because I could see how the stress of that first month or two could have broken down team.

2 (24m 53s):
So he's easily and had bunch of finger pointing but instead it was like compassion. Okay, you've got you've got

1 (24m 58s):
and also Johnny our customers. Okay. So like Arc, I mentioned that our business our e-commerce business doubled the gifts the donations to our kids Foundation 300% since March first three hundred percent of is appreciative Rises at times like this and

2 (25m 15s):
it's a beautiful thing to witness in humanity and I just wanted to share a very important part of our team is our Life's good kids Foundation are Playmakers and they stepped up with all sorts of

3 (25m 28s):
adaptation hundred percent before we let you guys go. What is something that you've learned about your leadership in the way you are operating your company that you want to continue going forward.

2 (25m 39s):
I would say two things listening and hiring people with that same optimistic resilient trait and I think we've done a good job of those things. But the reason I bring it up is it has shined as such such a bright Spotlight on our leadership team and the rest of our team that they have that in them that we didn't have to say. Hey guys. I know this is brutal and unprecedented, but we have to think where are the opportunities and how do we survive we didn't have to say those rah-rah speeches. They were already doing it. They were already leading and collaborating with each other in ways Burton. I don't even understand like slack for example, and then the listening part that was such a crucial turning point when we first were trying to decide do we need to shut down like for the whole summer and it took the brave voices of several people on our company to make it clear to us that it would benefit the whole team including those in our warehouse more if we found a way to safely open and no matter what your title is make sure the ears are open and you've got enough space for people to raise their hand and to chime in because the team really helped us guide toward an excellent Solution that's helped us

1 (26m 57s):
survive. Yeah, I would just say that Clarity is really important. So in times like this a lack of clarity exacerbates your problems and I think while we as John pointed out didn't have the solutions to a lot of things. We were really clear about what matters most we have a very simple Mission spread the power of optimism. Let's listen closely to our customers and see if we Innovate and find ways to adapt here and as John pointed out, thankfully, we've got a lot of smart hard-driving leaders in our organization that figured those things out. So Clarity I think is huge and just enabling your leaders.

1 (27m 39s):
The other thing I would say is that it's the 21st century. And anybody who thinks that they're a smart entrepreneur or a smart marketer and they're going to build their brand on their own you're kidding yourself. You have to enable your consumers to co-author the story of your brand and that's what's happening every day for our brand as we're growing right now. We're listening to them were collecting data on what they love what resonates with them exactly what words exactly. What message is why get them to talk about it get them to share send pictures of what you're doing etcetera and celebrate their lives with them. So I think we need to do more and more of that.

1 (28m 21s):
That's the way we're going to build our Unity going forward not by being professors, but by being students

3 (28m 27s):
John and Bert Jacobs, thank you so much for being on it's been great

1 (28m 31s):
having you guys. Thank you. Keep it up and we'll see you another time. Thank you so much guys

2 (28m 35s):
congrats on the book. And we really appreciate you having us on

3 (28m 39s):
that's an excerpt from my conversation with Bert and John Jacobs. The cofounders of life is good to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews you can Find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR and if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Matt Adams Gianna, Kappa, Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days.

3 (29m 20s):
I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this. from NPR