3 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more.

1 (15s):
Hey, it's guy here. So I've never asked you for much. This show is free and we think about it as kind of like a free MBA program each week. We bring you the stories of failure Triumph pivot strategic challenges. Mishaps and problem-solving from some of the world's greatest entrepreneurs and it's all free and always will be but now I'm asking you to consider buying my new book based on this show. It's called how I built this and it only costs about 20 bucks and this book is designed for anyone who's thinking of building something or just wants to be inspired by people who have built some of the most iconic companies and brands on Earth and if you preorder it now like in the next few days I will send you a free signed bookplate.

1 (1m 3s):
So please go to how I built this.com or Gyros.com to order the book and get your free signed book

3 (1m 10s):
plate.

1 (1m 15s):
Hello everyone and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes as you know, we're talking with entrepreneurs and other leaders about how they're adapting during this economic crisis. And today. My guest is Iman a niece who is better known as poke main. The number one female streamer on Twitch Pokemon started playing video games when she was 12, but it was mainly a hobby until she joined twitch, which is a popular streaming platform for gamers as Following grew and grew she eventually decided to leave college and pursue online gaming full-time and with more than 20 million followers across several platforms and a makeup and clothing line poke main has proven that the gaming industry is ripe for entrepreneurs like herself.

1 (2m 4s):
Alright, so for people who don't know what video game streaming is. Can you first just kind of explain how it

3 (2m 11s):
works? Sure so for starters, I'm sure. Sure, most of you guys have at least seen a YouTube video basically live streaming is like watching a YouTube video except the video is live and it goes on typically for much longer than a video typically a few hours actually so you can tune in at any point and you can catch a live broadcast. You can chat with other people that are watching the same thing as you at the same time. So it has a lot to do with interaction both between you and the broadcaster and you and other viewers and the other way to explain it. Specifically, I guess the video game aspect and a comparison that is made very frequently is in the same way you watch professional sports.

3 (2m 52s):
You would perhaps watch a professional gamer or sometimes you watch people for entertainment. Okay. You just watch people do things. You also

1 (2m 59s):
enjoy. Yeah, and so I guess like just a few years ago. You are a college student in Canada. You are a chemical engineering major. How did you get into video game streaming?

3 (3m 10s):
So I started playing video games at a very very young Young age. I always tell my brother playing them. So, you know as a younger sibling I wanted to do whatever the older siblings thing and I kind of continued playing all throughout high school and I got really into this one game League of Legends in high school and I heard about twitch and Twitch streaming because I was already in this Gaming Community. My friends would like me different streamers and I thought it was such a cool thing to do. I just looked at it and I was like, wow, I wish I was in there place. I wish I could That and by the end of senior year in high school. I was able to save up some money and buy a second-hand PC.

3 (3m 54s):
I begged my parents to upgrade the internet and I started screaming just on the side every now and then for fun and slowly as the months went on my stream started gaining traction and growing but I was always so set on taking the educational route and doing my degree may be getting a PhD or a dog. Accurate or whatever it is. That was always kind of the path that I thought I would take. So I went to college or university studied chemical engineering and then during my second year. I kind of realized that I would either have to give up engineering or take time off of school because it had gotten to a point where there was just no way for me to balance both and I also felt really bad not being able to give my all both to my studies and seeing how good of a great day.

3 (4m 44s):
Could get or how well I could apply myself and also not giving my all to streaming and seeing how much I could grow my community or my online presence.

1 (4m 52s):
So just to understand how this works. I mean you basically create a profile on Twitch or one of these platforms which is free and you were playing games and then slowly people just started to follow you and watch you play and then it kind of just grew organically.

3 (5m 6s):
Yes. So there are a lot of different ways that you can kind of gain traction on Twitch or any social media or any Form for me personally, I think it was a lot of networking from of my viewers would mention my stream to other streamers then I'd make friends that way so it had quite a bit to do with the networking and a lot to do is just organic growth and a bit to do with intentional marketing like being a part of Facebook groups for the kind of games that I like and things like that.

1 (5m 35s):
Wow. So this was a real hustle. It wasn't just like sitting back and waiting for people to kind of follow you you actually really worked it. I mean you kind of network you talk to Streamers you tried to kind of get people to talk about your stream and that's how more and more people found out about you. Did your passion for video games? Just was it just something that you kind of naturally and intuitively just love just connected

3 (5m 57s):
with mmm so much of my childhood revolved around not just games but I think a really particular aspect of playing online games is the community part of it all I remember being 12 and making online friends and knowing I can't say my full I'll name online. But you know just trying to find a place or you belong which ultimately I think everybody in life is doing and I really feel like that's what online communities gave me and being able to make friends from all corners of the world and finding people you connect to I think that was really a big part of why I love gaming and stuck with it for so long.

3 (6m 37s):
So I got really lucky with my brother introducing me at such a young

1 (6m 40s):
age. So basically you're in college and you you're starting to master. Following of people who want to connect with you and watch you play and you realize that you can't actually be a college student and also a streamer because you're devoting so much of your time

3 (6m 56s):
streaming. Well, actually I was just that as the years go on obviously in an engineering degree. The classes are about to get more difficult and more time consuming. So I just knew I quite physically would not be able to maintain a streaming schedule as well as go to all my classes and pass all my classes. Luckily this kind of coincided with a time where streaming I had always seen it as a really fun hobby and something that I could make side hustle money through but I didn't really look at it as a full-blown career because I wasn't making much money off of it, but around that time sponsors and company started entering the space and they started sponsoring streamers like me.

3 (7m 38s):
So for example, they would just say okay for $2,000 a month. You just need to put our Company logo and branding on your stream you need to use these products this many amount of times and yeah more and more companies started entering the space in this capacity and also agencies and Management Group started joining the streaming space so that they could facilitate these deals and that's what I could really see it developing into a true business and realizing wait. This is something that I could maybe someday turn into a full-fledged

1 (8m 13s):
career. So you left Judge, and you decide I'm going to turn this into a career in business and you have I mean you actually this is now a big business and you've got I think like five and a half million followers on Twitch, but across your social media channels and YouTube you've got like 20 million 20 million followers must just unbelievable. And this is I don't even believe it right like four years ago. You were a college student and now you're like a major celebrity in the world of gaming I mean, G badly do you get recognized on the street? I mean in normal times pre-pandemic when we weren't wearing masks. Did you get recognized?

3 (8m 51s):
Yeah, I think ultimately depends where I'm going. But yeah, usually a couple of people recognize me which is always so sweet and flattering and most people are extremely nice when they meet you that is actually a part of going out that I kind of

1 (9m 5s):
miss. Yeah. Tell me about what a typical day is like for you. I mean, how many hours a day are you playing games?

3 (9m 12s):
So a typical day I Probably wake up around 9 and I like to start my stream or my broadcast around 11 or noon and then I usually stream between four to six hours. But sometimes I'll go up until nine hours. Sometimes I'll do 12 hours. It depends if I end up doing something that I really enjoy or yeah, sometimes the hours just fly by but there are some days where maybe you're not having the best day and every hour feels like Of an algorithm and it's kind of hard to truck along but it is what it is regardless of what industry you're

1 (9m 51s):
in and do you take breaks is it like for five straight six hours straight you can take

3 (9m 56s):
breaks, but you don't really want to take too many breaks because one of the most important things about live streaming in the same way that when you have a radio hosts the saying like you want no dead air, so you don't want any moments where people would just be sitting there watching. Your chair and not hearing anything not watching anything not listening to anything. So, of course, you can take your time get up go grab a snack do whatever you just have to be mindful of how often you do that. And in what way you do that whether you leave anything entertaining for your views

1 (10m 29s):
to do you move to LA from Canada to really to pursue this business and and let's kind of dig into it a little bit. I mean you have editors you've got a manager for editing team. You've got social media folks a Manager business manager, you got a real team. So walk me through some of the some of the things you're doing. I mean, obviously you're gaming you're streaming and that I'm assuming there's Revenue that comes in through sponsorship. Mainly that way,

3 (10m 58s):
right? Yeah. Also a major part of live streaming is something that we call subscriptions. So on YouTube you can subscribe for free and it's almost similar to following a channel. Whereas on Twitch the site where I live stream you can follow a channel So you see when they're live and you see when they're not but you can also subscribe for a set monthly fee per month. For example, five dollars, maybe ten maybe twenty five. So it's almost like you're pledging that money to that channel in exchange for certain benefits on the channel benefits, like in the chat you have like a little icon beside your name, which shows that you're a paying subscriber. You can have little emotes that you use in the chat and different streamers will have different benefits of their own some Play games with our subscribers.

3 (11m 46s):
Some of them have subscribers only chat. So there's all these different ways of kind of making money within the live streaming space for the live streaming website. And then there are an infinite amount of external passive income sources that you can

1 (12m 2s):
create. Wow. So your Revenue stream is super Diversified. I mean, you've got sponsorship for what you do you've got subscribers and then also you have other products that you're actually like a makeup brand for Example tell me a little bit

3 (12m 16s):
about that. So I did do a makeup collaboration with the winky Lux, which basically just involved me and them coming together and creating a few products. So a lip balm and eyeshadow palette where I pick the colors and the formulas and the things that I liked putting it all together creating. I guess like a cohesive look or aesthetic and then promoting that through my channels, so that's a great way to make income or another way to make income basically. When you have an online community of followers, there are so many ways in which you can kind of bring them to different products or try to create value for them in exchange for income.

3 (12m 56s):
Yeah, honestly, the possibilities are endless. There are people who create coffee brands. I've also partnered up with a clothing brand that I co oh now there's so many things you can do when you have an online

1 (13m 9s):
audience. I mean, this is so interesting because there's you know, what entrepreneurship me it means a million. Different things right and at its core and entrepreneurs somebody who runs her own business. That's it and most entrepreneurs in the US and Canada are people run Etsy shops one person. It's just one person in their store. But really, I mean, you know, you've kind of developed a business around your brand and your ability to influence people. And do you have Brands coming to you saying? Hey, we want you to promote this we want to sponsor you on that. What how do you sort of pick and decide who you want

3 (13m 41s):
to work with? That's actually really good question early on. My career I felt like I was doing a lot of resume building obviously what I'm in college debt. I'm kind of taking any deal that I think is good or where I enjoyed the product and there's no conflicts and then I got into a phase where I was making some money, but I knew I wanted to work with larger companies. But in order to do that, I kind of had to almost like build credibility by working with similar brands that maybe aren't as big even if those sponsorships or perhaps a bit more. Walter I wasn't as interested. I feel like that was the resume building part of my career. Luckily. I've kind of put in the work.

3 (14m 22s):
I have a name and brand of my own and so I can be really really picky and choosy. So I guess the saying I have now is if it's not an SES than it's an oak so I kind of just try to work with the companies that I'm really really excited to work with

1 (14m 37s):
when we come back in just a moment Pokemon talks about the business of gaming and what she's learned about battling her critics. Stay with us. Gyros and listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition and I'm speaking with poke main about some of the difficulties.

1 (15m 18s):
She's faced as one of the biggest streamers on Twitch. We have a lot of questions coming in. This is from Pamela staffer. Hope I'm pronouncing her name, right? She asks, what advice do you have for young women who deal with threats and sexist Behavior online. I know that you face this you've borne the brunt of some of this and you're so nice. You're so kind. I mean, I just the idea that somebody would Anyway, how do you deal with

3 (15m 43s):
it? I mean for starters. I just want to say sorry and that I really empathize with anyone that is going through something like that. It can be a very very scary and difficult thing to go through especially when you're new to an industry or seem like this. It'll be very off-putting as well. I think one of the biggest pieces of advice that I can give you is to find a community of women that can support you. That is truly Been one of my just like absolute savior's being able to talk with people who understand what you're going through and empathize and share tips and tricks and really feel protected in that sense helps tremendously.

3 (16m 26s):
I don't think I could have gone through the things that I've gone through if it was just me alone. And if I didn't have the friends and support system that I had especially other female streamers and also to document everything for safety purposes and Try to ignore as much as you can it sucks to say but a lot of these people really just want your attention. They don't know how else to get it. They don't know how to get it in a positive manner. And so they will go the complete extreme opposite route because typically obviously people do react when they're scared do your best to obviously be a safe as possible. But if you can't avoid reacting to these people, that's what I'd recommend as well.

1 (17m 8s):
How did you build that resilience? I'm curious, you know, I don't have The same kind of audience you have and I get very little abuse because how I built this isn't that controversial but you know occasionally we do I do and and and it sucks, you know, it's never fun because you want people to enjoy what you do you want to make content for people that makes them happy and inspired. How do you stay resilient and strong when you're just getting like pummeled with just

3 (17m 34s):
meanness? Honestly, it's something that can be very difficult to deal with at times because whether it's a street Our YouTube channel or a podcast you kind of want to be creating and dealing with your community the people that like that so it's kind of hard to Fathom why someone who claims to dislike what you do would braid you with negative comments, right for starters. I try to just accept that it's okay for me to feel bad about these things that I need like no emotions to not feel bad when I read some of these messages ultimately. Yeah. I try to validate my feelings, but also So not expose myself to all this feedback too much.

3 (18m 15s):
I don't think it's healthy for me. Someone who probably gets thousands of comments about me to read all of these all the time. Now, of course that doesn't mean that I should ignore criticism or ignore the negative things that people say, but just to take everything in at an appropriate amount. So it's not overwhelming either positively or negatively and also recently I read daring greatly and that book was absolutely amazing. Especially I related so much to just when she spoke about also receiving so many negative comments or hate and someone in her position who's had so much success also say that there will simply be days where it gets you and where it feels bad and you cried out but then you just get back up and keep moving and keep creating the things you want to make for the people who want to see them

1 (19m 4s):
so such great advice a great book during greatly by brene Brown. There's a question from Jack's of I YouTube Jack's asks, how do you keep up? Balance between your live streaming career and your personal life, you know considering almost everything you do is creating content in some

3 (19m 19s):
form. Absolutely. I think thanks can get very complicated when you are the product that you are selling. Basically that's kind of what being a content creator is like or being an online personality or a public figure setting clear guidelines for myself for when I'm working and when I'm not has helped a lot. Reflecting on what I want my boundaries to be has been really really important. I used to struggle a lot with just the sentiment of if someone asks me this specific very intimate or personal question. What am I going to say? And it feels so overwhelming in that moment of like, oh, I don't know what to do.

3 (20m 1s):
Do I answer do I not but if you reflect on these things prior and just kind of tell yourself that it's okay to say, I don't want to talk about these topics. I don't want to talk about this and I hope you respect. That everything kind of just deflates and things that feel like a massive problem can stop to be if you are ready and willing to set those boundaries yourself.

1 (20m 21s):
Yeah. This is a question. We addressed a little bit of this how Izzy culture going to change pop culture. We've got logic who's on how I built this and he's a streamer and you're going to be in a movie with Ryan Reynolds. I should imagine. It's just a cameo. Really cool. Yeah, how do you think e culture is going to change pop culture or he is but what do you see happening as we move

3 (20m 46s):
forward? I think that the two are only going to continue to become more and more intertwined. I see both pop artists and K-pop artists and content creators almost like mixed together in the things that they do in the sense that more traditional celebrities are now trying to be on Tick Tock. They're trying to put their songs and their our dances on their to obviously benefit from the exposure that I can gain and be a part of that community and people that start off on Tick Tock or trying to become more traditional celebrities where they want to come out with songs and albums and be on Billboard charts. So those two will just continue to integrate further and further and it'll all become in my opinion a sort of gray area where people want you to do it all don't want you to be all over social media and to do the more traditional Outlets But ultimately I just wanna remind One who goes into any of these fears are Outlets to do what makes you happy.

3 (21m 44s):
I always thought that the largest amount of success was to go mainstream and then do more traditional things whether that's movies or songs, but I realized that that area of that industry has its own difficulties and issues in and of itself. So when I think about it, I would much rather stay at home and have full creative control of everything I do and put out the content that I like so to each their own I want

1 (22m 8s):
to ask you a question. This is from Stuart. Symington. I think the Stuart symington we know hello Stuart. He asks if there's been a lot of talk about the challenges of broadening representation and live streaming. You were born in Morocco. It's such a cool story. I mean, do you kind of feel a pressure or be a desire to kind of help lead the way to broadening representation in live streaming?

3 (22m 30s):
Absolutely and when I got into it, I didn't consider any of these things at all. I was just 17 year old girl having fun playing. Video games but now that I recognized my position within the gaming industry, sometimes I do feel a pressure that is a bit difficult which is to kind of represent a lot of women in gaming and also I absolutely want to uplift more women people of color lgbtq. Just I just want there to be so much diversity in gaming and one of the biggest reasons why is because to me it's always felt like a place where I can belong just based off of the things that I love regardless of my gender or anything else and I want the same thing for everyone else.

3 (23m 15s):
I feel like it's the perfect thing that anybody can Bond over. This

1 (23m 19s):
is a question coming in from Facebook from Jose Rodriguez. And the question. I'm wondering about to what do you think is the lifespan of this type of business and if there is let's say A medium or short term life span, how do you think about diversifying your business outside of gaming because you must you must be thinking about

3 (23m 38s):
that? Yeah. It's actually been immensely interesting and fun for me to implement almost all the things that our regular business would need to to survive long-term and to see all the similarities between being an online content creator and running an actual business, which for starters are things like adaptability. You have to be able to move and adapt with the trends if you are really good at one game and for whatever reason I'd of your control that game just dies in a year or two. Then you wouldn't want your career to die with it and I'm sure similar things apply to people who are just product developing or producing also diversifying in the same way that you'd want to diversify your streams of income as a content creator.

3 (24m 28s):
You have to do the same with your online platforms. That's why you say oh you have five million on Twitch, but cumulatively you have over 20 million followers and that's been a very very Thing on my behalf because I know that I can't depend on just one platform for the rest of my life if I want security. I need to make sure that I have a viable future on whatever platform will be the most popular one in however many years from now.

1 (24m 53s):
Yeah, and I mean do you think about other products and services that you might come out with? I mean, you know down the road.

3 (25m 0s):
Yeah. So actually that was the reason I got into chemical engineering. I just thought that product development was so cool and making something that could provide valuable. Value for people was really cool. So I know that is ultimately just a huge passion of mine and I'll probably be creating in some form or other for the rest of my life some other areas that I think are really really interesting. Actually. I would love to someday write a book. I just I love things that are almost in a sense more intimate to a person like things that will mean a lot to them. So whether it's reading something that inspires you or doing something that makes you look better and feel better about yourself. Things like that, really really cool and exciting.

1 (25m 41s):
So cool. Your story is so cool. I love it. And I love the business that you built out of this Pokemon. Thank you so much for joining

3 (25m 49s):
us. Thank you for having me.

1 (25m 51s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Iman on he's better known as poke Maine to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR and if you want to find out more about About the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events. You can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Matt Adams Gianna cappadonna, John Isabella, Julia Kearney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you back here in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you been listening to how I built this from NPR