2 (0s):
Hey everyone. So as many of you know, we launched this special series back in March to talk about how businesses are building resilience during this really challenging time. We've had some amazing conversations and I hope they've been helpful in this week. We plan to have conversations with lots of people from the entertainment industry to find out how they're dealing with the global health and economic crisis, but we decided to take a pause. We didn't want to take any attention away from a much much more important. Orton conversation happening in America right now over racial Injustice. So we postponed most of those conversations except for to including this one. You're about to hear with Troy Carter.

2 (41s):
We first profile Troy back in May of 2017 on the podcast how we grew up in West Philadelphia with no money or connections and Rose to become one of the most influential people in the music industry and I would add to that one of the kindest as well. Troy's managed everyone from Lady Gaga to John Legend and also, And several of his own media and music companies. We were originally meant to talk entirely about how the pandemic has disrupted the music industry which we did as you will hear later. But of course the more pressing story about the demonstrations and protests demanding Justice with something we wanted to talk about first. How are you doing?

1 (1m 21s):
You know, I can't even lie and say I'm going well right now I'm probably where a lot of people are right now. Just you know, I think Already dealing with the global Health crisis and then to sort of have the events that unfolded over the last few weeks and the aftershocks of those events happen as well. I think it's been a it's been a lot just unpacking things emotionally and but also intellectually and strategically and just getting to work on some of these issues.

2 (1m 60s):
How are you talking to your kids

1 (2m 1s):
about it? You know what my 17 year old daughter. She was actually at the protest and Lala right before like things got crazy on Saturday to me as scary as his, you know to have her at one of these protests to be honest, which is just too scary to be black in America, but not wanting to stop her from expressing her feelings and exercising her, right? Is an American citizen and you know on the phone with my 24 year old son, as you know, you got protesters going throughout his the neighborhood that he lives just making sure that Keith physically safe.

1 (2m 47s):
So, you know, I think we're I think it is eye-opening moment for a lot of people in America just to be honest. This is like everyday life for a lot of African-Americans and and our country and you know recently I was on a trip probably five months ago with my YPO Forum which is you know, Young Presidents organization, and we did a retreat to Mexico City and is 10 of us. We get out of our SUV to pull up to the hotel all of the guys go in the back to get their bags and since the moment I go in the back to get my bag I get attacked by security like physically attacked by security.

1 (3m 29s):
Yeah, you know, and I'm the only black guy and my wifey, okay. But it was a crazy moment because you know, they've heard me talk about this before but to actually see this in action is just as biased that's kind of built in but I'm glad this is being addressed and now it becomes a real

2 (3m 50s):
conversation. Yeah. I mean as a parent Troy like I'm sure you struggle right because on the one hand, I mean your kids are independent adults, right and they want to be there and express their anger. And you want to support that but also as a parent you're worried about their safety and I'm sure that must have been kind of an anguishing thing for you to go to kind of think about.

1 (4m 12s):
Yeah, absolutely and it's the reality of what we have to deal with them. One of my son's is in the music industry and I worry about him traveling. These are things that are genuinely worried about I was on the phone with my best friend and co-founder Jer and In the other day and I have this Airstream and he called up asking about an Airstream to drive from LA to North Carolina where his mother lives and his mother called him from North Carolina and said I'm worried about you driving down here because you know, the south is still the South but when he and I spoke is like this is like a conversation that a mother would have with her son and the 50s or 60s during the Civil Rights Movement.

1 (5m 2s):
Aunt and the fact that we still have to worry about our lives as we drive across the country to do a road trip. It's just a different set of concerns that we still live with as parents. And as Anna citizens and is hard for people to really understand it and especially like somebody made a comment and a chat room. I was in the night about how money could change it and I'm like It doesn't matter and power doesn't matter. It's just this bias that that sort of baked in and the recipe of of of America that we've had to live with but now I think what we've seen does different with these protests.

1 (5m 48s):
This is what I consider just a merger of the Left Behind where it is just these are white black Asian Hispanic people that have been, you know, saddled with student debt people who Can't pursue the American dream because of just the way that the economic divide right now people who feel like, you know, they they're not going to have their shot and what we're seeing in the streets right now is just of a merger of all it is built-up

2 (6m 16s):
frustration in Detroit in this past decade. You know, we've had Trayvon Martin we've had so many examples but I mean, it's strange because already 10 years ago. I feel like we started to have these conversations and nothing has changed and it's it's Very very depressing. I don't know. I don't know any way any other word to use.

1 (6m 37s):
Yeah. It's I wrote a letter to my staff yesterday and because it took me a while just to kind of even really talked openly about this and I reference Rodney King, right, you know, we had technology at that point which was like the camcorder, you know, and until you didn't have technology to sort of address that right and then when we saw the incident with Karen and the bird watcher and Central Park and we saw you know, a white woman weaponize her privilege. And actually it was fascinating to me to actually watch the process and the octave go up in her voice with fear that octave was a dog whistle that people who get here it new with that note wise and to see the Success of privilege and action I think hit a nerve with people because people aren't used to actually seeing that and then see an innocent person on the other end.

1 (7m 43s):
We're kind of pissed me off with it though, you know in the news the next day, you know, I'm reading the New York Post and everything and is talking about you know, the guy had a Harvard degree, you know, he was a bird watcher. He's on the board of this, you know society and these things who cares we shouldn't have to justify. Any of those facts, he shouldn't have to have a Harvard degree or be a bird watcher to be an innocent person being accused of sub something like that that could have ended up in him being arrested or his death and you know, I think within this truncated period of time people have been able to see these things all back to back on camera within a matter of a few weeks at a time when people have had this pent-up frustration.

1 (8m 32s):
Bien in their homes being away from their friends being away. And so people are just bursting at the seams right now and all of this frustration. What I hope is that this isn't a moment that this isn't just a blip on our historical radar that this can be a catalyst for change because if this is just a moment shame on

2 (8m 54s):
America, you know, Troy I am I lived in Germany for for two and a half years as a reporter and what really struck me about Germany. Germany is an imperfect country. There's racism there's anti-Semitism but they embarked on a decades-long experiment to reckon with their past. It's not perfect, but they have become a healthier society and a stronger society and really a more peaceful Society because they have made a collective National attempt to reckon with their past. The United States has never done that and it sort of occurs to me. I think that so many people that were sort of reaping what we sowed as a country. You know for our failure to to reckon with 400 years of slavery and oppression

1 (9m 38s):
so so light and an America you still have statues of oppressors, you know with like only five years ago. We were managing Meghan Trainor and we went on this concert tour of state fairs, and this is our first time doing it. So I decided to take my wife and my two daughters. We're on a tour of Bus and we get to Troy Pennsylvania, ironically we got off the bus and I remember my one of my daughter who's 6 now is one so she was just starting to walk and me and my daughter who's 17 now, we're walking through the fair and is only these Merc stands with Confederate flags at one after another and a guy walked up to me and you know basically said like you know what?

1 (10m 32s):
What are you doing here? Like, you know, are you a dancer? Like you know, what like, what are you doing here? And this is Pennsylvania. I grew up in Philadelphia. So you would have never and then we went to Ohio after and on stage. It was a confederate flag right behind the stage and Charlie puth refused to go on for his soundtrack until they took that flag down. This is five years ago. So we're still reminded of our play. Place and this country so you'll never get the chance to reconciliation. We all know the truth, but we'll never get the reconciliation.

2 (11m 11s):
That's Troy Carter when we come back in just a moment. We'll switch gears a little bit. I'll ask Troy about how the music industry can play a role and what it still has to learn in this very difficult moment. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built.

2 (11m 52s):
This resilience addition. Troy Carter has built an amazing career in the music industry and in the early days. He relied on live performances and world tours to His clients fan base, but with concerts cancelled for the year and possibly next and fans stuck at home. I asked Roy, what will the music industry look like in the next year or so? It's such a weird moment to talk about the entertainment industry or anything really because I think my mind and the minds of so many people watching is focused on this really just overwhelming conversation the events that are happening but we're also in the midst of economic crisis and a global Health crisis.

2 (12m 36s):
How is the overall situation affecting the production of music recording music recording albums collaborations obviously live concerts, too. But how is it affecting the industry right

1 (12m 49s):
now the good thing with the music industry our product on the record side is mostly digital. So, you know, we had the luxury of not having to rely on man. Factor in plants or Trucking and all of those things to get our product, you know from here to there and if we were still in the CD business, we'd be really screwed. You know, if people had to actually go to a store to buy the product. So I think on that side we're fine on a touring side is catastrophic and the reality is we probably won't see this look normal until 2022 in my opinion, you know, just because I think you have won still the Social distancing you think about economically whether people are going to be able to afford tickets, but on a positive side, I think it's going to accelerate technology in terms of finding better options around live streaming.

1 (13m 46s):
Yeah. I was just telling a friend recently like the last concert experience is good in one sense terrible in another sense because only a small percentage of people have really good seat for sure. Some of the scene is just Like where you don't see the details and artists work so hard on like these details in the Nuance with lighting and all of these things and I think technology can provide everybody with a much better seat and a much better experience. So I don't think live would go completely away, but I do think technology can provide a very rich experience and if I'm over the age of 65, I'm sorry, but I'm not going to you to or Eagles concert with A hundred thousand people in the audience, right?

1 (14m 35s):
So I think you know seeing some of these Legacy bands is going to be tough, you know, just because you know sort of short of a vaccine and and all of these things I don't think people are really going to take that risk, but I do think this is going to provide a good opportunity.

2 (14m 50s):
I want to ask if we could actually getting some questions and this is from Andrea. She's asking since doesn't feel right to me to be all over social media with anything other than black lives matter content or even to release Lyrical music right. Now, what are your thoughts on releasing music in the coming

1 (15m 6s):
weeks music Is A Healer, you know, I think at the end of the day we still need things that are gonna make us smile bring people together. I think there's going to be a lot of politically and socially driven music that's born out of this moment. But I do think we're I do agree is we can't walk away from the subject. We can't pretend that. At this moment didn't happen. I don't think people should be tone deaf and his mama and not address it but the way I feel like last night, I got sick of watching the news and I just needed some Netflix for a second just to take my mind off of and so so hopefully people are still releasing content where we can step away and sort of refresh and have a moment where it just doesn't break us down completely.

2 (15m 58s):
This is a question from will plays do you think that the music industry is as such? And right now, I mean, you can't physically promote music. You can't perform live. I mean is the industry taking a hit right now

1 (16m 9s):
funny enough, but I think it's taken a hit in two ways. Right? So I think both crisis is showing the vulnerability of the music business, you know, I think with the pandemic, you know, we talked about the fragility of the touring business promotion business even down to going out to visit radio stations and promote the records and Dawn late night. Shows and all of that stuff, you know you sort of see where the fragility is. So that's covid related what we're seeing with the sort of racial crisis that's going on people talk about how to NFL only has, you know, three or four black coaches and no African-Americans and the front office that music industry is much much worse than NFL what black music has contributed financially to the music industry.

1 (16m 58s):
What black culture is contributed, you know? Into the music industry and when you look at the ratio of actual black Executives in the music industry. Yeah, it's appalling you actually believe it or not have white people that are the heads of black music with the title at some of these companies, you know, it's and literally you have qualified black Executives in the company, but actual white people with a title the head of black music is like it's crazy. And so like the fact that the music industry that Prides itself on being Progressive and providing opportunities still has these structures in place and I think the last couple of weeks has sort of brought this part of the conversation to a head as

2 (17m 51s):
well. It sounds like if ever there was going to be a kick in the butt now would be that moment. He would

1 (17m 56s):
hope it's about being fair guy when we think about fairness. I'm going to I'm going to rephrase that because I want to be very very very Frank. A lot of people are under the impression that it's like okay, everybody has it has a shot. We live in a country where everybody has a shot. But when you look at the education system you look at where people actually start from I know for a fact my personal Journey was incredibly difficult and Know how much luck was on my side. I know how much things just had to go completely right at any given moment the things that go well, but I had to get very very lucky to get where I am today and we don't want handouts.

1 (18m 50s):
That's the thing like where I went. I had to explain to somebody this weekend, you know, they're like, okay we want to do a foundation to Black businesses. I'm like, no, it's not a Nation like those black businesses should be held to the same standard of return on capital is just the opportunity to have access to that Capital have access to the support and training that y combinator companies may get or that, you know, first round Capital companies may get like it's just it's just a matter of access and even when and places where certain individuals may fall short because they Not have the background.

1 (19m 34s):
Let's lean in a little bit more understanding that there may be a little bit more of a learning curve but giving them the ability to catch up. That's the part that's challenging. I went through something a couple years ago like a dispute and what I was explaining to the person on the other side of the dispute, I made a statement along the lines of I said as a black executive is a lot of Of other black Executives behind me. So you hurting me isn't just hurting me. It's hurting a lot of black Executives behind me. And the person said they actually set it to TMZ.

1 (20m 17s):
They said Troy Carter uses. The race car said the race car. I'm like, yep. Yep or on with the with the deck of cards you use that deck every single day. So the fact I have to educate you. On the impact of what you're doing and how it impacts other people the results are different

2 (20m 40s):
if we if we watch this video in 5 or 10 years from now and you could you can imagine how this moment would change things are impact things. What do you think could happen? I mean are you it's I don't want to ask if you're hopeful because I hate that question, but sort of a version of that question, you know, are you do you think that this moment can really actually change things and move the It'll in a significant way that other moments. Haven't

1 (21m 6s):
if American history teaches us anything. The answer would be no, but as an entrepreneur and somebody who is just crazily optimistic about about everything. I am optimistic that this is going to have an impact on this generation who may not put up with what they're seeing right now because it impacts On a personal level as well. So we're race May not impact you but I can promise you the lack of Economic Opportunity is going to impact a lot of people that's going to be that bigger impact guy and that's the part that nobody's talking about right now where we have a lot in common in terms of across every single race and ethnicity and gender and religion is Is economic divide and what economic divide that's what we're going to see opportunities go away.

1 (22m 9s):
And so if we're looking in 10 years we're going to see the impact that technology is going to have on the workforce. And how many jobs are going to go away and when we look at where education is right now education won't keep up with technology. Yeah, so we need we need to have a lot more empathy right now. I just beg people just be empathetic. Look at what happens in communities in our country look at like when people talk about black-on-black crime people talk about what's happened and family structures. Look at the psychological impact that slavery has had on families where I can imagine my kids being torn out of my arms.

1 (22m 56s):
I can imagine all of these things and so just have some empathy around this issue. Let's just admit that we got it wrong is a country and take a step back and try to fix this moving forward. Let's have some empathy right now

2 (23m 13s):
Troy Carter. Thank you for joining us. Thank you for being here and your wisdom and hope to see you when we get home. We're all able to see each other face to face again.

1 (23m 23s):
Yes, and thank you guys, and thank you. Thank you for giving us this platform. We appreciate

2 (23m 28s):
it. Thanks as my conversation with Troy Carter the founder of q a Music and technology company to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR and if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilient series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org and of course, you can check your feed every Monday for a brand new full-length episode of How I built this this episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia. Arnie Gianna, Kappa Dona Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening stay safe, and I'll be back with you in just a couple of days.

2 (24m 10s):
I'm garre's and even listening to how I built this from NPR.