1 (0s):
Hey, welcome to how I built this resilience Edition twice a week. I've been sitting down for live video chats with different Founders to find out how they're coping during this crisis and on Thursdays and Saturdays. We're posting excerpts from those conversations right here. And on today's episode. We're going to hear from Jen Hyman the co-founder of Rent the Runway Rent. The Runway is a company that allows you to rent clothing and accessories at a fraction of the price you'd pay to buy and last year. It was valued at more than a billion dollars, but Since the global health and economic crisis Rent the Runway has joined many fashion companies that are confronting furloughs closing retail stores and seeing drops in revenue and a huge question facing Jen.

1 (42s):
Hymen is how do you get customers interested in renting clothing at a time when few people are going out talked a little bit about the business. I know most of your business is based on the subscription model. You do have some physical stores that you closed down you had to layoff and furlough some Please tell me what's going on with with Rent the Runway right now.

3 (1m 4s):
Yeah, it has been a big challenge because so much of our business is based around people leaving their homes, whether you're going to work or you're hanging out with friends, you know often the act of getting dressed is somewhat an external act where you're getting dressed for something and we definitely find when people are sheltered at home. They are Focusing a lot less on getting dressed and on clothing in general that being said the real challenge has not necessarily been about the business or about Revenue dropping.

3 (1m 45s):
I would say that it's about the acknowledgement that who we are today as a company is based on believing in a vision that there was a smarter way to get dressed and that women deserve more and Since we've all been pushing a boulder up a mountain together and the fear that I have is that we can't let that Boulder drop we owe it not only to the thousands of people who are part of this team today, but to everyone who has ever believed in this Vision to keep the vision alive and to make sure that we continue to push the boulder up the mountain and I think that that's the struggle that you're feeling this, you know, the collective.

3 (2m 30s):
Of passion of a whole group of people who have dedicated their hearts and souls to really trying to change change the world

1 (2m 38s):
Jen. I know I mean you have all these employees who depend on you. You don't want to let people down and you have to make decisions that are probably gut-wrenching. Can you kind of walk me through sort of what you had to do and how you have kind of dealt with that?

3 (2m 53s):
Yeah, the decisions that we've had to make are certainly the most challenging those of my career, you know Revenue Has dropped pretty dramatically during this period of shelter at home. And so the first thing we did was we looked at all the non people expenses throughout the company and we decided to cut everything that we possibly could from Capital expenditures to inventory to marketing budgets to technology budgets, and we actually were very effective in financially restructuring the whole business and then another two weeks went by Bye and we saw that what we thought was going to be potentially a short-term shelter at home was likely going to be many months.

3 (3m 39s):
We realized that we would have to make very difficult people decisions. So we had to execute a small lay off but a much larger furlough our employee base across every single division of the company and its

1 (3m 54s):
gut-wrenching. Yeah, because I mean, I guess when you are looking at the company, it's like, you know,

3 (4m 0s):
How

1 (4m 0s):
do we make sure that we're going to survive this and that ultimately is what is going to have to guide decisions that you make?

3 (4m 7s):
Yeah. I've always thought about this period in terms of two distinct bases. There's a period of covid there's this distinct period of make it through shelter at home our lives throughout a shelter at home are it's fairly random as to you know, which businesses are thriving and or not thriving in a period that holds no resemblance to what our lives have. Looked like before or what our lives will look like after, you know, we don't want to live in a world of isolation. And so we have to make it through this period of shelter at Hope which is difficult for our business and I think for most of the businesses in the fashion industry, and then there's this larger period of the recovery and we're recovering into a recessionary environment.

3 (4m 54s):
We're recovering into an environment where people are going to have a different set of values and we've spent a lot A lot of time thinking about who do we want to be as a business through that recovery. And how are we going to ensure that we're positioning the business to recover even stronger than we were before him.

1 (5m 13s):
So to that point you and I mean what what is that going to look like what I mean? It's still early, right? And I'm sure the gears are turning in your head. But are you starting to see hints of what business might look like when you come out of it or how you may think about it a different way?

3 (5m 27s):
Well, I think that there's almost been 10 years. Years of acceleration of trends that we were seeing in the larger economy that's all been compressed into this period of time there's certainly a movement from offline sales and to online sales. I don't think that we're going back into a world where the majority of what we buys done offline. There's certainly a movement from waist to sustainability. We're literally sitting at home looking at our closets every single Staring at them and realizing we can live with so much less. We don't need the wastefulness of buying dozens of things every single year that we don't need so actually coming out of this.

3 (6m 14s):
I'm an even bigger believer in the circular economy, which we, you know, pioneered and one of the things that we've been thinking about it a Trends Runway is how do we even become a larger player in the circular economy? We certainly have been been a big player in the world of rental and in the world of subscription, but I think that the world of you know secondhand for sale can be a bigger piece of our vision and really owning the message of sustainability. The Third change is one that's focused on value, you know tens of millions of people are losing their jobs. Even if you have not been affected yourself your friends and family members have been affected and you're just going to think about how you spend your money in a different way.

3 (7m 0s):
And I think that there's going to be a return to Quality and a return to value and I think that that is something that has always been part of our mission that you know, people should have a smarter and more affordable way to get dressed and feel great. But I think that the offline changes are actually they're interesting but what's more interesting is how this period has changed how I think about leadership, you know, one of the core values of our company has always been everyone's founder of Rent the Runway and when I think about that what that means, you know being a Founder to me means taking risks making decisions feeling a sense of ownership feeling passion for what you're doing and I have spent a lot of time trying to think about how do we Empower everyone who's at the company right now to act like a founder and to make those really important quick decisions.

3 (7m 58s):
We need everyone's Collective. In power more than ever before and so we've changed a lot about how we lead throughout the company in terms of communication and transparency. You know, we've always been an organization not has been transparent about our numbers that's been you know has communicated openly with our employee base, but I would say that over time as we have thousands of employees and we certainly have employees of different levels, you know, their becomes kind of a Cadence that potentially you share. R more with your senior leaders and less with your you know more Junior employees and we've kind of thrown that away over the last few months where we have weekly all-hands meetings.

3 (8m 41s):
We're sharing all of the decisions that we make and the whys behind those decisions were sharing all of the data. We're trying to be as transparent as possible because we think that through transparency, there's two things that happen one empowers people with the data to make decisions quickly for themselves, which we need. But the second thing is that it breeds even deeper trust, you know, when you're going through a crisis, you need trust more than anything else and the way that we've approached trust is through is through

1 (9m 11s):
transparency. I'm going to take some questions. I'm gonna sort of collapse to questions from Betsy's who to from Facebook and also from Jordan Scorpio from Facebook given all of the challenges and the difficult news that comes in and the hard choices that you have to make how do you say sort of positive and upbeat? I mean, do you have moments? Where you just kind of want to collapse in the bathroom floor and cry? No cry it out. I mean, how do you just stay kind of you know

3 (9m 37s):
together? It's been really hard to stay together. And I've had a lot of moments where I am collapsing at the kitchen table or the bathroom floor with my kids and just hugging them and I think that that's human, you know, one of the things that's been fascinating as an entrepreneur through this experience. Is that over the last decade is I've been building Rent the Runway I've had so many mentors So many people to lean on whenever there's a really difficult situation you kind of know who to pinpoint through your network who to call who to ask advice what's been so lonely about this period of time is that there's really no one to call to ask advice because no one has the answers.

3 (10m 18s):
Everyone's going through this for the first time. We're making decisions with incomplete information. So what I've decided to do instead and what brings me hope and joy is that I have a network of Of peers and I call them not to ask advice and not to give advice but just to be a friend and just to empathize to listen to what they're going through to have a voice to share what we're going through and I think that as a leader like people are always telling you and asking you to show up as a leader and I think that what this period has taught me is like sometimes you just have to show up as a friend and show up as a human.

3 (10m 58s):
I've been doing these coffee chat. Sweet People obviously over to do with employees for my team that I wouldn't traditionally have one-on-one meetings with and I've been kind of dropping into their lives and you know, what I've used these coffee shops on a weekly basis not even to ask about what they're working on, but just to you know have their kids run into the frame and ask like what they're going through in their lives and it's created this intimacy around our team that I've never felt so Strongly before it's so interesting. I'm such a social extroverted person. I would certainly the person who like loves all-hands meetings and brainstorming meetings and I would walk around the office and always talk to people but this feels like I'm really getting to know my own team on a much deeper level and I think that that is incredibly special

1 (11m 51s):
when we come back in just a moment. We're gonna hear Jen's response to critics who say fashion and Beauty just shouldn't be a priority for anyone right now. Stay with us and Guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So Jen hymen has been leading Rent the Runway through an unexpected web of challenges from furloughs to Safe Warehouse practices.

1 (12m 39s):
Jan has been tried to confront these questions head on while asking her employees to think like a Founder. Are you finding yourself in a way? I mean when we interviewed you for how I built this we went through your story and you know, you'd invite friends over and you would take notes and you would stand outside of movie theaters or outside of rom-coms, and you would build your Mail list that way and I mean just all these kind of Scrappy Nimble things that you you did and could do as you and your co-founder. Just trying to start this company up in a sense. Are you finding yourself kind of back in that position again that kind of Scrappy and Nimble position where you know, any ideas are worth

3 (13m 15s):
discussing hundred percent. I think that we never experienced a world like this before where we're all sheltered at home are our priorities and values are changing so quickly. Quickly, so on one hand, you want to try all of these different ideas, but as an organization gets bigger. You also need to be more thoughtful to prioritize even fewer things and do them. Well, so we've tried to where we have like opened it up to Collective ideas is like what is the world's going to look like when we emerge and personally, I think we're going to work differently. We're not necessarily going to be going into offices five days a week.

3 (13m 57s):
We are going to die. You making smart choices and and value and sustainability more. So we were thinking about what if what to prioritize from a business perspective to align with that new world,

1 (14m 10s):
you know, there's been social media criticism. I've noticed about the fashion industry particularly around the fashion industry saying look, you know factions trivial right now people are at home. They don't need to focus on Brands and dressing nicely. You guys have come under criticism as well and in addition to many other companies. He's for first of all, can you can you kind of address that idea? I mean, I think it's a valid question to ask like while we're at home. You know, why why should we make the

3 (14m 37s):
effort if there has been a bit of a social media mom that has singled out the fashion industry and challenge this incredible industry for being frivolous or being trivial and I believe that anything that has the power. Bring normalcy and joy into our lives right now is very important. Who are we to judge? What brings joy into someone's life. Like we're not here to judge that were here to deliver it. I'm a very interesting person to have started Rent the Runway because I actually didn't grow up reading Vogue magazine or knowing the names of designers or even caring not much about fashion in the traditional way that people think about it.

3 (15m 23s):
What I realized about close. Was that close? This gave me the power to change my life. Like I loved how putting on a new outfit made me feel and what I'm finding during this pandemic is that we still have so many customers who getting dressed to them right now is the one act of normalcy that they do every day. It's the one thing that makes them feel like they're taking a step forward, you know, the power to change your clothes to me is really about the Order to change your life and that's what the company has always been about spend about democratizing not ability and giving everyone that power.

3 (16m 6s):
So I think that during this period of time we've seen that people are finding Joy is so many diverse things whether it's fashion or beauty or playing games, you know, listening to music looking at art and I think that all of those things are extremely important and I'm very troubled by what I think is this anti-feminist Crusade around one of the most important and largest Industries on Earth fashion being considered trivial

1 (16m 36s):
Jen. Can you address I mean a lot of e-commerce companies continue to operate the Fulfillment centers their warehouses. They've been criticized there, you know been articles you've been criticized for a to can you kind of just address this like what what's the thinking behind keeping warehouses and fulfillment centers open? And how do you make sure that all the employees inside are safe and taken care of?

3 (16m 57s):
Yeah, I if at first, you know every Warehouse across every single category right now, whether you're selling apparel or beauty or lawn care or Home Goods, like all warehouses are open and the first question is a leader that you have to assesses whether or not you can operate safely and putting the welfare of your employees and the health of your employees first and after you do that, That you figure out. How do you evolve how you operate in your facilities like to us? If you close down your Warehouse you're essentially render only one survived and the work that we've been doing over the last 11 years to build the company would just disappear.

3 (17m 47s):
I think that most businesses are not in the position that they can offer eight for months on end with zero Revenue coming in. So we've all just To make a series of very difficult decisions of which there's really no no great answers inherently operating anything right now is hold some risk to it. And and all you can do is do the very best in terms of safety and health or your

1 (18m 14s):
employees. You mentioned earlier about sometimes, you know, as a leader you have to show up as a friend which I think is really great. And I'm going to remember that. I'm sort of paraphrasing a question from Lee Razzle and as a leader, you know what to say Has have you had to make make over the past several weeks that have actually made you a better leader.

3 (18m 33s):
I think that as your business grows and you're inundated with data, you know you rest on your laurels you rests on data to help guide your decisions and what's been really interesting about this period of time is that you're making so many decisions with incomplete information without knowing you know, what's in front of you in so many respects you don't even Know how the government is going to operate and how the government is going to support, you know people who are unemployed. And so interestingly what it's taught me is that the only guiding principle for leadership is that you have to make decisions based on your values.

3 (19m 13s):
You have to be very clear with your team as to what those values are that becomes the rationale for what decisions you make and how you make them in

1 (19m 25s):
five or ten years when we look back on this period when you Think about how you want your business to have become more resilient out of this. You know, what do you hope you'll be able to kind of reflect on this time period look back on and say, you know, we learned this and we became that as a result.

3 (19m 42s):
I mean, I think that when you look back on this period of time none of the questions and none of the answers are going to be about business. They're all going to be about how do we create a life for ourselves that is fundamentally more focus on relationships and human connection. We've had in the past. I think that we've been too focused on work as a society over the last few decades and being at home with my daughters with my husband over the last few weeks has been one of the greatest Gifts of my life and it's not only been a gift for me, but it's been a gift. I see for all of my team members who have been able to contribute to this great vision.

3 (20m 24s):
We haven't Rent the Runway, but also like be more present in there. Day-to-day lives and I think that the learning 10 years from now it's going to be like we didn't have to make all these sacrifices. I didn't have to sacrifice, you know as much of motherhood as I have to be a CEO in to be a Founder. I didn't have to sacrifice as much with my own friends. I think that we have been put into a situation by nature of having to show up at an office every single day at 8:30 in the morning and potentially not leaving until very late at night. Are you've had to make those very real physical sacrifices and what this period of time has proven is like actually I can be a fantastic team member and leader when I'm with my family when I'm at home when I'm doing other things that I love and so hopefully we'll look back on this as like one of those reset moments for all of our lives that like there are things that are just way more important than work.

1 (21m 23s):
It's true. I took a little agree. I mean that part of it is really forced me and I think a lot of People to re-evaluate the time we spend at work and whether we have to be there From Dusk Till Dawn every day From Dawn till Dusk rather

3 (21m 35s):
and they certainly don't you know, what is what is work mean? And what does he even like finding Talent from your company? What does that mean? If people can really live from wherever they want. They can live their lives and in different ways, you know, one of the biggest challenges for women has been that 50% of women leave the workforce. Do they have kids and some of those women leave because they want to be stay-at-home moms and that's wonderful and some of those women leave because it's just too complicated to be an employee and be a mom and you know, take care of of your responsibilities at home.

3 (22m 16s):
And this actually may be the best thing to ever happen to women's empowerment, you know the idea of more remote work and to trust that we can do it in A more livable thoughtful way this actually may be the thing that levels the

1 (22m 33s):
playing field. All right. I love it. I love that idea Jen Hyman. Thank you so much for joining us. It's been so great to have you read our Summit in 2018. It was so fun having you there and what we love to have you back. So hopefully you'll join

3 (22m 46s):
us. I'm so excited to hang out in person with you and everyone in my life. I cannot wait

1 (22m 54s):
that's an excerpt from my conversation with Jen Hyman the co-founder of Rent the Runway. To see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. You can also hear my original full length interview with Jen Hyman from August of 2017. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot org, and of course, you can check your feet every Monday for a brand new full-length episode of How I built this This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney Gianna. Cappadonna, Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

1 (23m 35s):
Thanks for listening to stay safe and I'll see you in a few days. I'm Gyros and even listening to how I built this from NPR.