2 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, I just want to tell you about the how I built this book. It's coming out in just a few weeks. But if you preorder before September 30th, I will send you a signed book plate for free. If you love this show if you love the stories you hear on it, if you're inspired by them, if you're looking to start a new business or just thinking about it. Well, you may want to check out the how I built this book. It's full of inspiration ideas stories and insights pre-order. Your copy of how I built this by visiting Gyros.com or how I built this.com for more details.

2 (41s):
Hello everyone and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're thinking creatively during such a disruptive time. And today we're going to hear from the cofounders of rinse a Jai prakash and James June rinse is a laundry and dry cleaning service that picks up cleans and delivers close right to their customers doorsteps rinse was founded in 2013 when Jay wanted to start a business. He approached his college friend James who'd worked at his parents dry cleaning shop as a kid this year. Ren's has seen a drop in dry cleaning orders, but their laundry service has stayed steady and they've been able to avoid layoffs so far.

2 (1m 26s):
I spoke with a J and James from their office where they're practicing the social distancing in order to keep their essential business running to explain. What what is what is rinse? How does it work? Yeah,

1 (1m 37s):
I mean rinse in its simplest form is pickup and delivery. E of dry cleaning and laundry we started in 2013 to give you little bit of background at the time. I was looking to start a company and I was excited about a couple of Trends one was the idea of bringing technology to Old School Industries. And then James actually came to me with the idea of doing something and dry

2 (1m 57s):
cleaning. You guys are college friends, right?

3 (1m 59s):
Yeah exact. I'm no J for 20 years and you know, my background was more in healthcare, but my first job in life was all about my parents and the dry cleaner store so they put me to work when I was young my An answer also in the industry and so for as long as I can remember during family gatherings, we would talk shop. We would talk dry cleaning all the time more recently. The discussion is really focused on why is business so slow, you know, why isn't there as much business as there used to be and so in 2013, you know, Jay and I were meeting up for breakfast to discuss, you know ideas sort of businesses. I just come back from my parents store and wanting to hear that business is slow and then just see it in person is just Stark and so I was I was prepared to see customers and machines running and it was silence.

3 (2m 46s):
And so well that image stuck with me. And so when it was going to eat breakfast with the Jay I asked to Jay, you know, what can we do to help dry

1 (2m 55s):
cleaners? Yeah, and and that was a moment for me where the the bells kind of went off and I thought dry cleaning was perfect for the trends. I was looking at I'd always be James as a potential co-founder, but you know, I think it was too good to pass up that unique Advantage. We brought to the table with him understanding. The dry cleaning side of the equation and so we ran out a week later did a test with the leaven of our friends. We picked up their clothes. We clean them at James's parents shop. We delivered them back and and from all of them. We got this unanimous responsive. Hey, this is awesome. When you guys coming back.

2 (3m 26s):
Well, I mean, I love that because the business model right for dry cleaning has been more or less the same. It's been small mom and pop shops like James like your parents or maybe they've got a you know, some people have a few dry cleaning shops, and there's like Zips and some of these He's small chains, but really it was an industry ripe for a completely new approach.

1 (3m 46s):
Absolutely. And I think the biggest thing is that as consumer Behavior has shifted what's become very clear in dry cleaning is that it's just it's full of a ton of friction and it's not one big point of friction. It's a lot of little points of friction along the way. So if you think about the dry cleaning experience historically, you don't know who's a good dry cleaner. So you just go to the nearest one you're held hostage proximity. You can't assess quality until after the clothes come back. So it's a A crapshoot for us as customers. The model is very vendor Centric in the sense that they're open 925 closed on weekends, which doesn't work if you're actually at work during that time and there's limited technology limited customer service limited transparency. We call that internally Death By A Thousand Cuts and when we were getting rain started our idea was let's just a matically create a seamless experience from start to finish work with the best cleaners out there who are struggling.

1 (4m 36s):
They don't know how to give volume let them do what they do best, which is clean the clothes and then manage everything. Else and so that's that's how this got started. So

2 (4m 43s):
essentially I mean you get you get a nap and you put in your order and then it somebody comes picks it up. And then you partner with different dry cleaners to clean it. You don't you don't own your own facilities your own cleaning

1 (4m 53s):
facilities. That's right. Yeah, so you schedule a pickup. We only serve the customer and we continue to serve the customer between 8 p.m. And 10 p.m. Because that's more in line with the customer schedule. It's more customer-centric. We send our valets to come pick it up there all WW2 employees, you know, they're the front lines of the customer experience and they'll come Your clothes answer any questions similar to what a counter person might do at a cleaner and then we bring it back to our facility and our cleaners will clean it and our goal is to work with the best cleaners. The reality in the industry is that all cleaners are underutilized they all have excess capacity and they don't one know how to get volume and then to because of that vendor Centric approach their world tends to be very spiky during the week, you know, they'll get that Monday morning rush and then the rest of the week is kind of quiet but we've done is built a model where we're going to to send our cleaning partners of predictable steady stream of volume allow them to clean the clothes fill their capacity, but then also allow them to grow and actually be able to plan for growth because we're sending Volume 7 days a

2 (5m 52s):
week, you know, a lot of a lot of dry cleaning shops don't clean on site. They just collect the clothing and then send it off to a central, you know location that cleans dry cleans for, you know, a hundred different shops. I'm curious James. I mean, I mean did your parents initially say Hey, you know, this idea might put people like

3 (6m 11s):
A business, you know, it's you know for them. They always had the opposite reaction in the sense that their generation as a Jane mentioned. They're very good at cleaning clothes customer acquisition has totally transformed. So there's a whole class of entrepreneurs who don't understand that customer Discovery is gone online. And so what's happening is that volume is decline because people are searching for companies and services online. So we found that as a need that we could help fill so it's our job to armed with the best dry cleaners and then give them volume, you know, we're going to acquisition we want to partner with those who are really good at cleaning and make that a win-win situation.

2 (6m 49s):
So you don't I mean really you don't need your own facility. You don't you don't need to build a cleaning plant or a processing center for clothing at all

1 (6m 59s):
right now and I think is when we started rinse the idea here was to really build a process and Technology layer on top of an existing infrastructure. You know, right dryclean has been around for a long time. There are some things out there that are Very good, but there are a lot of very good cleaners out there and they just need help getting volume. And that's that's really really stepped in.

2 (7m 17s):
Yeah. I know that you made a point of saying that your drivers are W2 employees. You're in California, obviously, California State Legislature passed a law clearly targeting Uber and Lyft that so-called gig workers need to be W to employees. Those companies are challenging that law but you decided to make your your drivers employees of the company. It sounds to me like that was a conscious decision that you were very intentional and deciding on that because it's more expensive.

1 (7m 43s):
Absolutely. They've been WW2 since the beginning since 2013, you know, as I said, they're effectively replacing the counter person and and if you as a customer are using rinse and you have a totally normal service experience, the only person you should ever see is Your Valet and so for us we wanted to make sure we were able to hire the best people train them develop them invest in them. And certainly it's more expensive to employ valets, but it's better for them. It's better for rent is better for the So it was a it was a no-brainer decision up front. I know I believe you've

2 (8m 14s):
raised close to 24 million dollars since you launched in 2013 and then here here we are in this really odd unusual challenging situation. I have not done any dry cleaning since March. I've been doing my own laundry and I imagine lots of other people have so I imagine you've also seen a drop in your business.

1 (8m 37s):
Yeah at a high level we're holding up. Okay, and I think the key thing to Understand is that we offer dry cleaning and laundry and the way those two Services have behaved during the pandemic are a little bit different so dry cleaning has certainly taken a hit. You have less people going to the office. Let's try traveling, you know, weddings and graduations and formal events aren't happening. But laundry on the other side has remained pretty stable and we have a subscription laundry service as well, which is actually been growing a little bit during the pandemic. So, you know, there's all things considered we're holding up. Okay, we've been able to ensure Financial Civility and sure job security for the whole team and I think you know even more importantly when all of this hit in early Marge We, you know Centaur anyone who could work from home work from home starting March 5th.

1 (9m 21s):
We're an essential service. We've remained open this entire time. The first thing we had to do is really take a hard look at our operations and make sure that every step of the way was maximized for safety and reducing the risk of transmission. And so yeah, we basically, you know day one started to look at every every piece of it

2 (9m 38s):
just just say curiosity James. How's your parents business doing right now?

3 (9m 43s):
You know, I think they're holding up. You know, some of what AJ said it's definitely down there in a position where they're you know, wanting to retire for a while, but rather keep the routine, you know, there's not really customers coming in just for routine sake yeah, like many other dry cleaners. They're probably running their machines once a week. Wow, you know, it's definitely take a hit especially in the Bay Area where we've had shelter in place longer than most parts of the country. And so yeah. You know it stopping we've done a lot as a company though with the cleaning partners that we have provided them with relief resources directing them to programs that can help them now because we have cleaning Partners not all of them are in fluent in English, you know, there's a lot of information out there changing every single day.

3 (10m 27s):
So we spend a lot of time directing them towards relief programs and says that that's how

1 (10m 32s):
yeah the cleaners we work with most of the cleaners. It's not easy for them just to say hey, I'm going to start doing delivery or hey, I'm going to start offering laundry. It's they're totally Different businesses and so for us when we were looking at our Clinic Partners, we weren't sending them as much volume on the dry cleaning side and on our cleaning Partners, we have partners that are specifically for dry cleaning and specifically for laundry. So one thing we did starting in April was we actually spun up the production of reusable cloth masks. We ordered them from our cleaning partners for our own team and then decided to extend production to sell to customers and we found you know for at least for a couple of months. We were able to offset the decline and dry cleaning Revenue with the sale of mass and

3 (11m 10s):
That's interesting. Yeah

1 (11m 12s):
honors continue operating

2 (11m 14s):
when we come back in just a moment AJ and James tell us what to look for in a business partner and how they've been ready for this moment since 2013. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm talking with a Jai prakash and James June the cofounders of rinse about the big lessons.

2 (11m 58s):
They've learned from building their startup. Let me get this question from Simo on YouTube. It's a good question. How did you guys attract customers at first? This is a question that we always deal with on the show the chicken and egg problem. Right? Like you're going to dry cleaners and you're saying hey we want to partner with you. We're going to bring you a lot of customers, but Every customers then you go to customers and saying we're going to get you the best cleaning but Unity cleaners I had it added you Simon James you had you had an advantage in your family had a family business. But how did you get customers at first?

1 (12m 28s):
Yeah. I mean we did have an advantage because one thing you do want to do is you need to get the supply side up and running before you start bringing demand in and we actually chose not to work with James's family to start. It was more finding business partners and we got a lot of skeptical looks at the time, but right The credibility that James brought to the table allowed us to Uh sign up some early partners and then in May 2013, we signed up 10 of our friends and then we started just testing out the operations. We put a circle around three zip codes in San Francisco and said, hey, let's prove it out here before you prove it out anywhere and then in June and July, we got more friends or their friends and it was all very much Word of Mouth early on and then we really started kind of added zip code by ZIP code, but it's important to remember in 2013.

1 (13m 11s):
It was a very novel concept the second we introduced the We're going to pick up and delivery of dry cleaning and laundry and you could do it with some form of Technology. It was we had a large email list right away. And that was part of the you know, early signals That We Were Striking a chord and it was worth continuing to pursue this. I'm

2 (13m 29s):
curious. I mean now that we're in this sort of covid period and it's likely we're going to be in this place for a while, right? I mean presumably you probably cut things like marketing and I know you didn't you didn't lay anybody off. So what other things are you doing like to kind of Steel yourself for a you know a period of time where your growth may not be what you had projected it to be in January of

1 (13m 52s):
2020, you know the the path of a start-up I think build resilience the whole time and the past 12 months. We as a company prior to the pandemic we're focusing on on getting to profitability right we're working on reducing our expenses improving our margins taking those steps. You need to reduce cash burn and and we made a lot of progress. So going into the pandemic we were actually well. From a financial stability standpoint to weather the storm and dry cleaning ticket hit the laundry's held up and that certainly helps or relative to you know companies may be in travel or Live Events. It's a different impact. I think for us the big question. It's not if dry cleaning will come back. We know it's going to come back the question is when and so what we're doing is we have as a very operationally complex business.

1 (14m 37s):
We have a mantra of always be paranoid never be complacent. It couldn't be more important than right now and so even though we Operating in covid is kind of normal for us. Now. We need to continue to maintain that vigilance. And then I think it's just taking various steps to reduce costs continue to drive growth where we can so that we're extending Runway as long as possible.

2 (14m 57s):
I'm curious about the competitive landscape, right? I mean, there are other businesses that are offering a similar service. And is there a world where we're heading towards a door - versus GrubHub versus caviar. Like is there a world where there's sort of a race to I don't want to say the race to the bottom but a race where you're constantly Undercutting other competitors to offer the best price to keep keep your customers where it becomes very difficult to become

1 (15m 22s):
profitable. We don't think that there's a world like that in our space. I think the one thing we found I mean we started when Uber and Lyft where the arms race is going and right. I think we recognized early on that. This isn't a land grab opportunity. It's really about providing a high-quality service the second you use us. If you don't have a good experience, you're not going to stick around and come back a bunch of times and so for us it's really about out nailing the execution at the end of the day. This is a industry where the barriers to entry are super low, but the barriers to scale are incredibly High because there's so much operational complexity and so for us, you know, we spent the last seven years really mastering that operational complexity implementing technology to be the most digitally Advanced company in the space and really focusing on as we scale.

1 (16m 7s):
How do you scale quality? How do you scale the customer experience? So, you know right now from a competitive landscape standpoint a lot of the startups that He started around the same time as we did are no longer around and the interesting Dynamic we might see in this space and less about an arms race and more that there are a lot of dry cleaners that don't want to continue dry cleaning. You have a lot of people who want to retire you have kids who don't necessarily want to take over. So there's a lack of generational transfer and you know, there is some opportunity potentially for consolidation, but it's not an

2 (16m 40s):
easy path. Let me ask you guys to put on your entrepreneur hat. I think a lot of People will consider starting a business right now people especially people who lost their jobs or people who are kind of looking at at the world and saying what do I have to lose do you think actually now is a good time to start a business in the midst of a financial and economic crisis and secondly, if so, what should somebody thinking about starting a business look for in a potential co-founder?

1 (17m 7s):
Yeah. It's a great question. I mean on the first part, I would say I think when you look at starting a company you have to ask the question. Why me why? Now, you know, why am I the one who should be starting a company in this industry and solving this problem? And why is this the right time? So for rents, you know, I've been focused on consumer startups James group and dry cleaning. There was a good story for us. Yeah, so do it and the why now is that it would bring lifted basically made the consumers realize they could use the mobile phone as a remote control for their life. And I think being excited about it is really important and then when you start working on your idea if you're excited the next week, keep going and if you're excited the next week, keep going Do what you have to do is you have to be excited not just by like the hey the glamour of what starting a company might be but then like doing the research and building the model and looking at the numbers and all the stuff.

1 (17m 54s):
That's not as fun. If you're still excited. It's certainly worth trying regardless of the macro environment. It's and it's a grind as you have

2 (18m 3s):
alluded to James. What do you think when you thinking about finding a partner clearly you guys have a strong partnership? And from what I from what I'm I do do a ju sort of focus more on. Shins and and business the business item James you focus more on product and development. Is that is that

3 (18m 21s):
fair? You know the way I think about it is, you know, my parents shop my mom focused on to the front of the house number of the back of the house. So I okay. I'm in the operation guts. So

2 (18m 30s):
okay. I got you. Okay, so I reversed it, right?

3 (18m 33s):
Okay, you know and I think that was you know, fortuitous. You know for two reasons one is a J's our EP founder for me. I have this deathly fear of losing my job and taking the leap and I'm I'm fortunate to have found such a because he's going to done it before. Yeah, and that was comforting and you know, really building my confidence actually make that leak secondly, you know terms of finding a good co-founder one exercise that we did early in 2013, which I didn't really understand it's time, you know, the wisdom of the Jay made us do this is if we went through a set of questions to really align it expectations and values. You know, why are we doing this? What are your goals? I do work together and those have now translated to our core values which got our company until this day.

3 (19m 13s):
And so if you're trying If co-founded a company with someone else go through that exercise. It could be with the friend. It could be with someone. You don't know that well, but you really need a line on your values and what your goals are. I think that is a critical step because I feel don't have that conversation and say hey, you know what? This is my friend. I'm going to trust him or her it may

1 (19m 30s):
not work out that way and just I mean it is like a marriage we've been in this town for seven years and they're still hopefully a lot more years ahead of us and I've known James for 21 years now, we're very good friends, but we still went through that exercise to say like, what do you want out of this? What are Your expectations, you know, what is your working style? All that sort of? Yeah, I think having a lot of those conversations up front are incredibly important because you need to have a line values just like a marriage you need to have a line of expectations. But then also I think there's an important factor of if you can have implicit trust in the individual that's really important because the you want to make sure that the people beside the you are going to be rocks and they're going to yeah, you know be there with you as you go through

2 (20m 10s):
it really quick before I let you guys go when you look back at this moment and Of years from now what are some ideas or values or approaches that you want to take with you into the future of the

1 (20m 21s):
business? Yeah, you know, it's certainly been a challenging time. Just like the second time you start a company or this the second kid you have it becomes easier. I imagine the next time we have to go through this will make fewer mistakes and will do everything better and faster, but I think you know, you can't predict what's going to happen tomorrow right in February. There's no way our plan factored in navigating covid and doing what we're doing and so it's really important to have guiding principles that help you during the good times and the bad times and for us, you know, we wrote Our core values in March 2013, and they've been the same core values for the last seven years and two of them that we've used our number one make Mom proud, which is a anode to James's mom who helped us so much at the beginning but really, you know, whatever action you take you need to be proud to tell your mom about and then the other is Embrace change and ambiguity and that one is really it applies to every every day of a startups life, but certainly applies.

1 (21m 15s):
And is even more pronounced during this time period so the importance of having core values the importance of having guiding principles so that when you get into situations like this where things can get blurry you can stay Rock Solid and focus on the goal I think is a really important takeaway.

2 (21m 29s):
Awesome guys. Thank you so much for joining us. Awesome. Thanks for having us. Thank you. That's an excerpt from my conversation with a J. Prakash and James June the cofounders of rinse to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this. And if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Tyra Lockhart Matt Adams Gianna cappadonna, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

2 (22m 11s):
Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy. Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR