2 (0s):
Hey everyone. So as some of you know, we've started this new series of video conversations where each week. I talked with Founders and entrepreneurs about how they're building resilience into their businesses right now and in case you miss these conversations when they happen, we are posting an excerpt right here every Thursday in your podcast feed. So today I'm bringing you my conversation with Simon sinek. Simon is the author of start with why and the infinite game and he writes about leading with purpose and cultivating smart and sane business practices skills. Have become especially critical at this very moment. So here you go. Here's a conversation. I had with Simon just a few days ago first. Can you just kind of outline what what this idea of the infinite game is

4 (43s):
absolutely a philosopher by the name of James cars-- articulated these two types of games in the mid-1980s finite games and infinite games a finite game is defined as known players fixed rules and an agreed upon objective. There's always a beginning middle and end and if there's a winner

3 (1m 0s):
There has to be a loser. Then you have infinite games

4 (1m 3s):
infinite games are defined as known and unknown players, which means any player can join at any time. The rules are changeable, which means you can play however you want and the objective is to perpetuate the game to stay in the game as long as possible when I learned this idea. I sort of profound because we are players and infinite games every day of Our Lives. There's no such thing as being number one in your marriage. For example, you can't win in your marriage that goal is to make it last as long as possible. That's the goal. There's no such thing as winning global. Politics there's no such thing as winning education. There's no such thing as winning Healthcare. There's no such thing as winning your career and there's definitely no such thing as winning business. But if we listen to the language of so many of our leaders they talk

3 (1m 42s):
about being number one right being the best or beating their competition based on what and so if we have to be

4 (1m 49s):
players in the infinite game, we have to play with an infinite

2 (1m 51s):
mindset. So there are five principles that you outline in the book particularly for Business Leaders who want to try and adopt an infinite mind set. So let's let's kind of quickly.

4 (2m 0s):
Through

2 (2m 0s):
them. The first one is to advance a just cause so talk about that for a

4 (2m 6s):
moment. So, you know the concept of having a vision in business is not a new one. The problem is it lacks a standardized definition and if you listen to too many leaders and they say our vision is to be the best X or our vision is to increase top-line revenues by why, you know, these aren't Visions. They're just goals their arbitrary goals set to arbitrary

3 (2m 24s):
dates. And so I

4 (2m 25s):
changed the terminology of vision so that we can be Crystal Clear of what we mean instead of showing up to to Simply hit a goal. We want that goal to be in service to something even grander a just cause a cause so

3 (2m 36s):
just we would willingly sacrifice to get closer to that idealized state

4 (2m 40s):
in the future. So what does it mean to sacrifice?

3 (2m 43s):
It could mean working late hours or are frequent business trips

4 (2m 47s):
and though we may not like these things we

3 (2m 50s):
feel that they're worth it because we feel like our work is

4 (2m 52s):
contributing to something bigger than

2 (2m 54s):
ourselves. I want to get back to that later on because I just did an interview for how I built this with somebody Pat Brown oven. Possible Foods whose business is exactly that I mean his idea isn't to make a lot of money making a meat product. It's basically to cut back on global climate emissions, but we have back to that damn the second principal building trusting teams. So right

4 (3m 14s):
so as human beings were social

3 (3m 16s):
animals, and we're no

4 (3m 19s):
good by ourselves, but we are remarkable in groups great organizations that are able to survive for many generations Beyond whoever the leadership is

3 (3m 26s):
now have strong cultures and strong

4 (3m 28s):
and cultures are made up of trusting teams. We all know what it feels like to be on a trusting team. It means you can raise your hand and say I made a mistake or

3 (3m 36s):
I don't understand the job you've asked me to do or I need help or I'm scared without any fear of humiliation or retribution. In fact, we say these things

4 (3m 44s):
with total confidence that others in our team will rush to our support. We also know what it feels like not to be an interesting team where we don't want to admit mistakes and we don't admit that. We don't know how to do the job. We've been asked to do for fear that it will either put us on a short list at the end of

3 (4m 0s):
Here or hurt

4 (4m 2s):
our chances of advancement or promotion.

2 (4m 4s):
All right, the next principle for trying to adapt create an adopt an infinite mindset study a worthy rival.

4 (4m 11s):
This is one of my favorite ones. So in a finite game you have a competitor and you want to beat the competitor your want your score to be higher than theirs at the end of the game, but there's no such thing. There's no there's no Finish Line in the game of business. So trying to beat our competitors's actually

3 (4m 26s):
hurts trust hurts cooperation and hurts Innovation because we become

4 (4m 30s):
so obsessed with a small number of arbitrary metrics over arbitrary deadlines that we can actually do so much damage to organization great organizations infinite minded organizations. They view the other players in their industry as Rivals rather than

3 (4m 44s):
competitors and some of those Rivals are worthy of comparison, which means there are other players in the

4 (4m 49s):
game. Who do what you do better than you whether it's their marketing or their culture or their hiring practices or just the quality of their product. They do things better than you and what we

3 (4m 59s):
want from our Arrivals is their strengths reveal to us our

4 (5m 3s):
weaknesses because the only true competitor in an infinite game is ourselves. It's ultimately a game of constant

3 (5m 9s):
self-improvement. And so by having our weaknesses revealed to us we can work on them.

2 (5m 13s):
This is probably the most appropriate one number four for the moment. We're living in prepare for existential flexibility. Wow,

4 (5m 21s):
you know, I so funny when I wrote about it, I talked about how it'll happen

3 (5m 25s):
once maybe twice in an entire career and

4 (5m 28s):
some leaders will go through an entire. Career and never have to do an existential Flex. Now here we are. My company is going through it right now ourselves. The majority of companies actually have to go through it existential flexibility is the ability to make a hundred and eighty degree turn in your company to either take advantage of a new technology or deal with up completely changed environment when the internet showed up companies had to make an existential Flex or they would go out of business and right and some still playing defense. Yeah,

2 (5m 58s):
so we're going to dig more into And a bit I'm sure as well because we're in this moment now where we really need to think about existential flexibility how to shift an entire business model the last and fifth principle is demonstrate the courage to lead what is courage to lead actually mean

4 (6m 14s):
so so many of these standard business practices that exist

3 (6m 16s):
today are not

4 (6m 18s):
actually infinite minded. They're very finite minded and many of the standard business practices that exist today that we

3 (6m 23s):
consider quote unquote normal or not normal the idea of shareholder Supremacy where we put the

4 (6m 28s):
once needs and desires of a disinterested. Today external constituency

3 (6m 32s):
over

4 (6m 33s):
customers and our employees was a philosophy that was promoted in the late 1970s and popularized in the 80s and 90s the use of mass layoffs on an annualized basis to

3 (6m 42s):
meet arbitrary projections did not exist in the United States prior to the 1980s and you see a whole bunch of these

4 (6m 49s):
philosophies that were propagated in the 80s and 90s that are standard today

3 (6m 52s):
that are very very very finite minded. So the courage to lead is the strength of character to say even though that's what everybody else is doing. I think that is wrong for the health of my business and

4 (7m 3s):
I'm going to do it differently and that is difficult

2 (7m 6s):
Sammy. We've so many questions coming in this assignment rapmon. He asks, what are your thoughts about connecting and motivating team members with their why this is in reference to a book that Simon wrote start with why how do you connect the motive 80 members with their why in the absence of being physically present of being

4 (7m 23s):
together? Well, the good news is that every single human being has a why the question is whether we are able to put it into words where the way able to articulate it. It's the sum total of how we

3 (7m 32s):
were raised its who we are

4 (7m 35s):
and the rest of our lives present us opportunities to live in balance with our wire not the decisions. We make the friends. We keep the jobs. We take the things we do will reveal to the rest of the world who we are. Yeah, and so the good news is finding one's why is a relatively simple exercise believe it or not. There are many many ways to do it, but I can tell you an exercise that that people can try and you can just do it for free at home

3 (7m 59s):
and it's called the

4 (8m 0s):
Test think of the friends who you love and they love you. Don't do this with a spouse don't do this with a sibling or a parent this those relationships are too close do the friend who you know that if you call them at three o'clock in the morning, they would take your call and vice versa and ask them this

3 (8m 15s):
question. Why are we friends and they're going to look at you like you're crazy. Uh-huh. What we're asking them to do is put into words a feeling. They have

4 (8m 22s):
towards you with a part of the brain that doesn't control

3 (8m 25s):
language. So they're going to look and be like, why are you asking me this weirdly enough you actually Ali stop asking the question why because the question why he

4 (8m 32s):
evokes emotional answers, but we

3 (8m 34s):
want rational answers. So now we actually start asking the question what come on. What is it about me what specifically is it

4 (8m 40s):
about me that I know that you would be there for me no

3 (8m 42s):
matter what and they'll struggle because they're attempting to put their feelings into words and they're going to start just describing random things. Like I don't

4 (8m 50s):
know you're funny. You're loyal. I trust you and you have to play Devil's Advocate. You cannot help them. You cannot let anybody else help them.

3 (8m 58s):
And you say great. That's the definition of a friend.

4 (8m 60s):
What specifically is it about me that I know you would be there for me no matter what and you're going to go through this exercise and it's going to torture them and eventually they'll

3 (9m 7s):
give up eventually they'll say look I don't know and they'll start describing themselves.

4 (9m 13s):
I don't know this is what my friends told me. I don't know Simon. All I know is that I could sit in a room with you and I don't even have to talk to you and I feel inspired and I

3 (9m 21s):
got goosebumps. In fact, I'm getting them right now. In other words your friends will say something to you that captures your

4 (9m 27s):
value in their lives, which is your value in the world. World which is your

3 (9m 31s):
why it's the thing you feel for them. And if you

4 (9m 33s):
do with multiple friends, you'll either get similar. If

3 (9m 36s):
not the exact same answer and every time they say something and you get that emotional reaction you get

4 (9m 41s):
goosebumps. Are you well up you're in the ballpark of your

2 (9m 44s):
why I love it. This is a question from Vivek Senna. I'm a physician every day. I walk in and see the staff facing their own fears and crying behind the mask while they care for others. I'm at a loss on how to motivate these already highly motivated people.

1 (9m 60s):
I

2 (9m 60s):
am humbled by them and draw strength from them. But how do I motivate the already motivated? How do I lead the

3 (10m 6s):
leaders? So he doesn't have to

4 (10m 8s):
motivate them. As you said there were already motivated. They're showing up every day. What he has to do is take care of them. I've been reaching out to combat Medics and ask them. How do you deal with extreme stress? And the crazy Pace that were it's nonstop and it's it's

3 (10m 21s):
hard every day and in the

4 (10m 23s):
military, they teach them to be open with their emotions

3 (10m 27s):
to ask for help to accept help. Help to cry and create safe

4 (10m 32s):
spaces for others to do the same. In other words to address those

3 (10m 35s):
emotions. They teach that this is trauma and

4 (10m 38s):
everybody will have to deal with trauma at some point is it's a bottle it up and keep it somewhere. It's gonna come out

3 (10m 43s):
later on. The point is is we want to we all of this tough-guy stuff that you have to be strong. No, you

4 (10m 49s):
don't the best thing we can do is that if you see someone crying

3 (10m 53s):
go up to the I'm gonna cry myself, you know, go up to the man and put your hand on their back and just Then with them and let them cry with you just don't let people cry alone. That's

4 (11m 4s):
the best thing we can do for each other.

2 (11m 6s):
Was it give you a hug right now? But I can't because we're physically gifted physically distant Sirens or

3 (11m 10s):
nickel to I'll take a ranger in the Bay Area you I will give you a hug

4 (11m 14s):
for sure.

2 (11m 15s):
You know, I'm wondering we're living at it such an unprecedented moment. Right? I mean that word unprecedented is now overused but in some ways this is the moment to think about the infinite game, right and if you are a business owner and you are looking at your Revenue, you know dramatically decline or stop how would you begin to apply the principles of the infinite game a to keeping your business going or be to you know what? I mean?

3 (11m 44s):
Yeah. Well, first of all, let's attack

4 (11m 46s):
one thing which is these are not unprecedented times. The business world is well familiar with changing Technologies or cultural conditions that completely challenge existing business models the emergence of the internet completely challenged

3 (11m 59s):
entire Industries.

4 (11m 60s):
Is no such thing as a video rental store anymore. They don't

3 (12m 2s):
exist and entire industries were flattened and some are still playing defense. And so these are not unprecedented times. This is more sudden. This is more jarring but having a business model challenged because of some sort of cultural or technological change in the world is not

4 (12m 17s):
unprecedented. And so it's the ones who Define themselves by where they're going by there. Just cause you know why they do what they do that will have better

3 (12m 25s):
ability to adapt than those who Define themselves by their product. So I'll give you a great example. There's a pizzeria in Chicago

4 (12m 32s):
that make seventy percent of its income from selling

3 (12m 34s):
slices. Well that just dried up the great thing. Is he took a step back and he said I have resources here that I can do other things with

4 (12m 43s):
and so he has this pizza oven and he found that he can take medical grade Plastics and because his pizza oven can get hot enough

3 (12m 48s):
he can melt them and bend them. So

4 (12m 50s):
he's now making face masks to sell to hospitals to protect the the Frontline medical

3 (12m 56s):
community. In other words. He's pivoted based on the resources he has and

4 (12m 60s):
Desire to stay in business.

3 (13m 1s):
So we have no choice which is we have to look at the resources. We have and the talent we have in inside our companies and that's how we figure out how to put it I use the technique in our company because we

4 (13m 13s):
had to Pivot I make make us we make most of our revenue from Live Events. Well, that doesn't exist anymore. Yeah. And so I used a technique that a my friend Jen Waldman told me I asked every single employee I have

3 (13m 23s):
I gave him 48 hours to bring 15

4 (13m 26s):
ideas each about what we could do and they freaked out that I I asked for

3 (13m 30s):
15 and the reason you want that many is because if I ask them for three or four they're all going to give me the same three or four ideas. And by the way, those are the same three or four ideas that I

2 (13m 38s):
had. Yeah

3 (13m 40s):
15 when you start getting 11 12 13 and the thinking starts now, you've got something.

2 (13m 45s):
Yeah, this is from Scott learner. He asks what Guidance Do you have to influence a senior leadership team that puts shareholders first, right? Like how how can how can you change their view that shareholders who premises is

4 (13m 60s):
Flawed model so the answer is you can't we cannot change people's minds and especially if they're multiple levels up above us know number of anonymous anonymously sent books will change their mind the way to do it is to be the leaders. We wish we had that we have to adopt the infinite mind set and we have to lead the way we wish we were LED

3 (14m 18s):
and what ends up happening is we have really high trust really high performing teams

4 (14m 23s):
around us because we've now taken upon ourselves to make sure that everybody comes to work feels inspired feels safe

3 (14m 29s):
and returns home fulfill. By the work that they do and what you start to have what starts to

4 (14m 33s):
happen is these little groups sometimes their divisions

3 (14m 35s):
tend to be higher performing inside the company which means one of two things happens

4 (14m 39s):
Senior Management leaves you alone because you're doing

3 (14m 41s):
well or if they're curious the

4 (14m 42s):
come and say what are you doing?

3 (14m 44s):
And either way some of the people in that group will

4 (14m 47s):
get moved or promoted into other groups and they'll take what they've learned and then you'll start to see little pockets of great leadership and other places and before you know it that person at the top who still has an old-fashioned view of business.

3 (14m 59s):
They're Retired and before you know it we've the Tails Wag the Dog if we take an infinite mindset, we have to appreciate that. It may not happen as quickly as

4 (15m 7s):
we would like, but we

3 (15m 9s):
can Outlast them this

2 (15m 10s):
question from Nick lubbers. I know you get a lot of college students at your event Simon. He's a college student. I'm assuming what advice do you have for someone to somebody graduating college in this environment looking for a job or starting a business or who might you know might with r good reason feel demoralized about the current situation.

3 (15m 28s):
So there are good reasons to be Be

4 (15m 30s):
down and depressed and think about all the bad things and all the disadvantages and we should do that. Like we should have our moments to go through that.

3 (15m 37s):
But at the end of the day like there's also good that's coming out of this. And what I would like him to do is sit down and make a

4 (15m 43s):
list of the 20 unexpected good things that are coming out of this, you know, I mean, I can tell you a few for me and for that the others have experienced. I'm texting a lot less. What I'm doing is

3 (15m 52s):
calling people a lot more and hearing that tone of voice. It's just a magical thing. I think we're recognizing that we've as a society.

4 (16m 0s):
We've over indexed on defining success in terms of productivity and in

3 (16m 3s):
reality our health and our happiness. It's not directly proportional to how productive we are. We're living a life like the 1950s right now, which is kind of nice like we stopped working. We turn off the computer we go have dinner with the family every single night, you know, there are 20 really great things that we should write down. And that's where the opportunity lies. I might go to one more question

2 (16m 25s):
from from our audience. This is from Camellia. She asked Simon what? Most important positive things or thing that you want people to kind of take away from this experience from you know, this health and economic

3 (16m 38s):
crisis service taking care of each other service. The definition of service is the willingness to sacrifice for others the willingness to sacrifice for a cause and I think that our nation has forgotten how to sacrifice if you go back to World War II there are plenty plenty plenty stories of young men who committed suicide because they didn't get drafted that the call to service was so powerful that people who couldn't go to war would buy war bonds so that they can contribute to the to the war effort and people who couldn't afford war bonds. Would Plant War Gardens. So there's this overwhelming sense of we're in this together and service requires sacrifice and shared sacrifice.

3 (17m 21s):
The magical thing of shared sacrifice is it actually brings a group of people together when there is shared hardship we come together and I think we have to recognize and it's It's amazing. Now for the first time in my lifetime in the first time in probably all of our lifetime. We are connected to every human being on the entire planet. We can relate to somebody who doesn't look like us sound like us and have an entirely different point of view on the world simply because we've gone through something similar and we have a shared experience shared hardship, you know, and the question is what can we sacrifice for each other? That's the definition of service and this is real opportunity to relearn service. I think

2 (17m 57s):
Simon thank you so much. I wish I could

3 (17m 60s):
be there with him. We could hang out.

2 (18m 2s):
Hope to see you soon. And thank you.

3 (18m 5s):
Be safe. Take care of yourself. Take care of others.

2 (18m 7s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Simon sinek. The author of several books including start with Y and the infinite gain to see our full interview just go to facebook-dot-com how I built this we're going to be putting these episodes in your feed every Thursday and hosting the conversations in real time twice a week. You can find those on YouTube on Twitter and at Facebook live. Visiting facebook.com slash how I built this next week. We're going to talk to Tim Brown and Joey's will injure the founders of all birds and also to Stewart Butterfield the founder of slack. So join us live on Wednesday and Friday at noon Eastern nine Pacific at facebook.com how I built this bring your questions.

2 (18m 49s):
And if you don't have a Facebook account, no problem. You can still watch if you want to find out more about these conversations or other virtual NPR events go to NPR presents dot-org. Org. Thanks for listening stay safe, and we will see you next week. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this.