2 (0s):
Hey everyone. So as many of you know, we've been running a series of conversations since March to learn how Founders are building resilience during the global health and economic crisis, and we were planning to devote an entire week to the entertainment industry with guests like Troy Carter and Kevin Hart, but given the events of the past several weeks. We wanted to broaden our focus and join the conversation that's been happening across the country and around the world about racial Justice. And today. We're going to hear from Kevin Hart. Now you may know Kevin as a stand-up comedian and actor but he's also an entrepreneur the founder of his own production company. He's a tech investor and he's got a new audio book out about the very topic of resilience, which we'll talk about a little later but first Kevin wanted to reflect on a mass demonstrations calling for racial and social justice.

2 (52s):
How are you doing? How are you? How are you feeling about everything that's going on right now.

1 (56s):
I mean, I think it's it's a crazy time. One of those moments in life where you realize that history has an opportunity to either repeat itself or be made the things that people ignored have grown to a point where there is no getting around it now and what was just some voices has become most voices you're seeing a global effort. In saying this can no longer happen. There's a piece of small happiness in there because when I'm witnessing mainstream America get involved and be vocal that's has been missing for a long time.

1 (1m 43s):
So it seems as if this time around now after the death is George Floyd and how it happened. It's so present and in-your-face that other people are like, oh, oh wait, This is what people are talking about. Oh, I had no idea. Oh that is wrong. And now people are starting to join but I'm tired man. I'm frustrated. You know, I wasn't my Jolly self that I normally am today because you kind of just get beaten up and what is yeah

2 (2m 21s):
on the show. We had Troy Carter on and he says hello, by the way, because I know you're old friends and you know, Troy I asked Troy same question. I asked you which is Do you think this time it will be different the response will be different and and what he said was if it's not then shame on America, you know, and what do you think? I mean we've seen people are on the streets for you know, Emmett Till all the way through to Michael Brown to towards happening. Now. Do you feel this This Time It's

1 (2m 47s):
Different. Well, there was somebody that was being interviewed on CNN. It was a black man with a black journalist and he said the names keep changing. but the color of their skin doesn't And that's so ridiculous when you say things like shame on America. It's past that to me. You know, it's past the shame on you you're talking about a world that is supposed to get better. We are all here because of the efforts that those before is put in to help allow us to do the things that we do for me as a black man and Entertainer and Actor and now CEO all the hats that I'm able to wear their worn because of the efforts that other black individuals men and women put in to put into lights they broke ground so that more ground could be made and more ground could be broken.

1 (3m 53s):
So right now if we don't break new ground, then my kids, you know, I'm a father of three about to be a father. And for what am I looking at for the future of mine? If as an adult the response is shame on you for not doing right that can't be anymore. We've been yelling and screaming for so long, but we need the help of mainstream America. We need the alignment and and that's what I felt like I'm starting to see I'm saying alignment and I haven't seen that man in my life. I haven't seen that this level.

2 (4m 32s):
President Obama spoke earlier today and he said he says I'm really similar, which is that the difference between the demonstrations in the protest today versus the 1960s is this is the really wide like swath of people who are taking part in it, and I thought that was really interesting observation. We are taking questions for Kevin Hart through Facebook YouTube Twitter, so please ask away and I'll try to get to some of them for we have to let Kevin go so you've got this new book out called the decision overcoming today's BS for tomorrow 6s. A lot of people who only know you as an actor and comedian don't know that you've got a production company. I mean, you're an entrepreneur you had a really kind of you really kind of took you like 10 years to break into Hollywood skill long time and you write you've written about this your writer and in the book, you've got this idea called weapons 11 weapons of success.

2 (5m 22s):
Can you tell us a little bit more about the concept and how its applied to your life?

1 (5m 27s):
Well, I can give you a very simplistic version and explanation, right? So people that succeed and people that find success after they have it or find it it becomes theirs and it's not often shared that journey is not often shared is something that they put in their pocket and they just keep it with them forever. But there's so many people that want to do the same thing which is succeed. And other than that they have to do it your way. That doesn't mean they have to do exactly what you did but A story that can inform them of how you did gives them a different lens to look through and unless you go search for this information.

1 (6m 12s):
You're never going to find it. It's not offered. It's not volunteer and that's a problem for me as a guy that's done so much and Achieve so much but at the same time failed there's a there's a mindset that I adapted along the way and the things that I now Use and value as my keys to success or overlooking what seems to be a closed door and figuring out a way to find the key that opens that particular door. There's a thought process that goes with that. So what I do is lay it out for people to come and simply be informed and you know light bulbs go off as you get older and as you grow and you you fall in love with these discoveries, so I'm talking to people people about how to fall in love with the opportunity of success with the opportunity of pushing yourself to limits that you only know that you're capable of achieving that's what this is about.

1 (7m 16s):
So, you know in life is all about the decision. You can make a right or left a U-turn you can follow the mat or you can choose to wing it in going a different direction. It's all about your decision. How do we take the sponsor? Feedback, that's what this is

2 (7m 33s):
about. Yeah, I mean on our show and I built this we talk so much about failure with entrepreneurs because failure is more interesting than success. Right? Like we learn more through the failures of others than we do through their successes and I really feel like the failures of had in my career, you know the jobs. I didn't get and the directions. I didn't take were blessings. They're really blessings. I mean, they're hard at the time they were crushing but had those failures not happened. I wouldn't be doing what I do. Now. Is there a failure like that in your career? That was just crushing at the moment, but When you look back on it, you think God thank God that actually happened

1 (8m 6s):
and them if I went down this list of failures, you would be giving mind blown every TV show that I didn't get in. My eyes was the biggest opportunity in life. Yeah, every pilot that I auditioned for and it was between me and one other person and I got it and this is going to be the one this is it this is going to launch me into whatever level of success. Have been waiting or fail I can go to a list of comedic opportunities where I thought that stage performance was going to be the performance to change my life. You know, we tend to put so much pressure.

1 (8m 46s):
Oh my God, if I don't do good today, it's everything's gonna be over. I'm going to fail. They're never gonna talk to me again. I'm never going to know that but generally I gotta knock this out the part, right? Nobody said that no other opportunities come from this. Nobody said that this is the end of you you said that To yourself. And now you work yourself up you made the decision to do that. So for me all my failures were failures that I made so much more heavier. The reality is they weren't that Heavy Soul Plane did not do good in the box office. And I said Soul Plane was supposed to be the movie That was supposed to make me the next Eddie Murphy Oh my God bootlegged it. How could they do this to me?

1 (9m 27s):
And my opportunity? It's over. Yeah wasn't over. They gave me some knowledge. They gave me some understanding that gave me preparation for my next opportunity to know what to look for and what to be okay with. Your attitude changes when your knowledge changes your knowledge changes when you experience this change and those experiences don't all have to be good. It doesn't and it's not going to be that way in the more you understand that the better off you'll be

2 (9m 60s):
when we come back in just a moment Kendall talked about his ten-year struggle to break into the entertainment industry and the lessons. He's learned along the way stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this for many.

1 (10m 12s):
Our

2 (10m 16s):
support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. Kevin Hart has a pretty impressive resume from Blockbuster movies that have made hundreds of millions of dollars to TV development deals with major networks. He also runs a production company called Heartbeat Productions making him one of the busiest people in Hollywood. And while we were talking last week in our live conversation viewers have all sorts of things.

2 (10m 57s):
They wanted to ask him. We've got a lot of questions coming in from Facebook and YouTube. I'm going to ask you this is from And Tabora, what advice do you have for young men of color who are trying to navigate White spaces? Let's say in the entertainment industry. For

1 (11m 12s):
example, my best piece of advice for you is to understand what you can do. Once again, I can only use myself as an example. So I was told that comedy starring a African American League when transfer Universal they just they just don't and within that conversation at the Aaron get so many times. My fight became asking Studios for the opportunity to be marketed internationally for an opportunity for my movie to be shown internationally. And when we had the movie Ride Along, I have my tour numbers and I said people are telling me that this doesn't translate but look at my box office ticket sales.

1 (11m 58s):
It does my numbers internationally just as strong domestically. All I'm asking for is an opportunity and I fought for that opportunity. And the studio finally met me and said we're going to give you a try and when they gave me a try I said I'm going to follow the pattern of What Will Smith and Tom Cruise did I want to go? I want to go over there with this. Try send me over and let me Mark it. Let me promote. Let me do everything. I possibly can and I went and I did the work I went and did junkets and did every interview and shook every hand and took every picture and a movie came out in the movie as success and it didn't mean I was International Star it meant that I showed that I can get success, but I'm nowhere near where I need to be.

1 (12m 40s):
So every movie I became repetitive with the same effort and even more I wanted to go over there and longer I want to do a bigger. Junkie a bigot or Shake more hands take more pictures make a bigger Premiere until they caught up to what I thought my comedic likeliness was on an international scale and after putting all of that and you look up today and my movies translate and it's not because Is I just happened to just they just put it up and people say oh we're going to see it. I put the work in I had to work those markets the same way that I work the domestic ones and it didn't come easy. So the challenges are we're behind the eight ball.

1 (13m 20s):
Unfortunately, it's a tougher. It's a tougher Journey for us than it is for others and that's what we're seeing now in HD and the world so the only way to break that mold is to grind. Try and fight and be a part of the conversation of change and you can't be a part of that conversation. You're not a part of self-belief. So I have the belief in yourself as well.

2 (13m 44s):
It's a question going back to what you were talking about earlier from Leo Avila by Facebook and he asks, how do you overcome the fear of failure? Because a lot of people are scared of it understandably Kevin, you know, if you've got so much to lose and you go into an Enterprise or business or even idea. I mean, it can be really scary for

1 (14m 4s):
me. I I've seen the bottom and when you've been to the bottom, you know that the bottom isn't that bad, right? The the bottom is the place that you start from and that you work from the fear comes in losing what you have or not accomplishing something to get you more. So there's a fear and there's a want that's attached to that. The reality is if it doesn't happen then what we all have the ability to figure Get out. I thought I was going to the NBA and I school I played varsity basketball. You could not tell me that I was not going to the NBA.

1 (14m 44s):
Nothing else was an option. I didn't go to the NBA the day when I realized you know what I'm not that good at this game that I thought that I was good at all these years. I got figure it out. There's

2 (14m 55s):
several doors out here and those doors are meant to be open you

1 (14m 58s):
can't act as if a door being closed is life-ending. It's not You can always retake a test. You can always go back to school. You can always strengthen your mind if you can strengthen your body. And if you're in a situation where your options are very limited because of surroundings

2 (15m 18s):
to find out the people that were in those same surroundings that

1 (15m 20s):
have possibly made it out and

2 (15m 22s):
find out how that's information apply it turn that stuff into a muscle turn it into a muscle. It can be done think I think Leo got a great answer to question Kevin your I mean prayer entrepreneurial hat for a sec. I mean you're involved in So Many Adventures, you've got the streaming service and a production company you've doing a so many other different things from your perspective what role do entrepreneurs and the business Community have right now to play in really finally addressing the issues of police brutality and racial Injustice because it it seems like you can't be silent. I mean being silent is taking a

1 (16m 0s):
side being silent is its It's catastrophic your silence basically says that you're not aware you don't care and that means that you're okay and you're content with the way things are and if you are it's a problem because we all know that the way things are it's wrong. I mean it's wrong. So as an entrepreneur that means that your person that moves different your person that creates your person that evolves and you evolve. Of this crazy ambition that entrepreneurs had so when you are a part of that that means that you're apart of groundbreaking Behavior, you're a part of change your part of progression this conversation that we're having now about social injustice is based around change needing to happen.

1 (16m 55s):
It aligns itself with the definition of an entrepreneur so to our young people that are in that space. Case this is a very important time for us all to not be the smartest people in the room, but to be together, that's the important thing. It's about us really owning ends and going you know what I hear you I understand and when you understand that means you're on the side of change, so to all entrepreneurs out there, I beg you encourage you not to be silent saying nothing is the worst thing ever. It's literally the worst thing that you can do right now.

1 (17m 38s):
Yeah,

2 (17m 39s):
Kevin Hart, so great to have you on so much wisdom and so much to think about and we really appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you man. Thanks for having me

1 (17m 48s):
and to all the listeners. I was just say thank you. And my assumption is that you guys are taking the side of just being a part

2 (17m 59s):
of the change. Thanks, Kevin. Thank you man. That's for my conversation with actor comedian producer and entrepreneur Kevin Hart to see our full. Interview, you can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org and of course, you can check your feed every Monday for a brand new full-length episode of How I built this this episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney Gianna. Cappadonna, Neva. Aunt and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening.

2 (18m 40s):
Stay safe, and I'll see you in a few days. I'm Kyra's and even listening to how I built this from NPR.