1 (0s):
Hey, welcome to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm guy Roz each week. I'm doing live video conversations with Founders and entrepreneurs about how they're building resilience into their businesses right now. And in case you

3 (13s):
missed them when they happen

1 (14s):
live, we're posting excerpts right here in your podcast feed. And by the way, if you're looking for a regular episodes of How I built this we are still making new ones. They come out on Monday. So check your podcast queue for the new Mondeo episodes. Okay today, we're bringing you my conversations with Two incredible chefs later in the show. You'll hear from Alice Waters the legendary founder of Chez Panisse, but first you'll hear from her prot?g?. Semi Nusrat. You may know someone from her cookbook Salt Fat acid heat, which is also the name of her Netflix series now normally sameen practically lives on airplanes, but these days not so much. Of course, this means been at home in Oakland, California carefully swapping ingredients with her neighbors and trying to make the most of her pantry.

1 (1m 0s):
I spoke to some mean about these steep rise in home cooking right now and I even got to ask her some questions from our live audience. Like what do you do with a head of cabbage and a ton of salmon? How are you doing in general?

2 (1m 13s):
Uh, I mean I go through ups and downs like every one I would say I live in a particularly special and like bucolic place. I live on a piece of property where for homes share a huge Courtyard and garden and I have a lot of nice neighbors. So I feel very lucky and also I go

3 (1m 30s):
I

2 (1m 30s):
own emotional swings like last week. I was just really grumpy and angry all week. And this week. I'm doing a little better though. Yeah, I think everyone really thinks I'm like or people like me or home just like creating genius culinary genius all the time. But the truth is I mean, I also am affected by the, you know, the scarcity and how hard it is to shop for stuff and also cooking is work. I mean, it's my actual job, but I think all of us Us more than ever realizing how much it goes into feeding ourselves. Even for me. I think I drink I'm going through so much coffee at home. I only drink one coffee one cup of coffee a day.

2 (2m 12s):
But still the I it's Dawning on me all of the sort of times that I just go and grab a sandwich or a cup of coffee somewhere else. Now all of that is coming out of my own kitchen. So I get tired too, you know, I eat a lot of toast for dinner. It's not always like the fantasy like what I think everybody thinks. Is happening but also there is some joy in the kitchen.

1 (2m 34s):
Yeah, totally the other day. I was I was like really wanted a chicken sandwich. There's an amazing chicken place in Oakland that you know bake sale Betty's and I wanted one of the sandwiches and I had bread crumbs that I bought at Trader Joe's like a year ago, and I found and I was like wait, I'm gonna make a fried chicken sandwich with this and it was

2 (2m 51s):
great. Good. Well, I think that's the thing is in a way. I'm like, oh I kind of wrote the guide for this time because the whole point of salt fat acid heat is to teach you how to think outside the bounds of a recipe and I think what recipes do and they are necessary is they but they make people feel like if they don't have this ingredient this tool this specific thing that they can't make it and right now it's like the time of substitutions and it's the time of improvisation my whole Theory as a cook my whole philosophy. My whole thing with cooking is think about what role those ingredients and tools are playing and Figure out what else you can use so you don't have to run to the store.

1 (3m 33s):
How are you getting ingredients met? A lot of people are you know talking about having a hard time getting butter or flour eggs, you know with a lot of people don't want to wait in line Forever at grocery stores are do you have any like hacks to just get stuff?

2 (3m 50s):
I wish I did. I've definitely been waiting in my fair share of lines. I mean, and I know that this is tricky but on my street We share a lot of resources. I know this is definitely not what everyone has but across the street, for example, somebody has chickens and then we have many fruit trees. So we're just constantly sharing stuff and also cooked food. I live by myself, but when I make a big pot of soup or a big pot of beans or you know, big lasagna, I'm constantly sharing that end at first. I think there were a lot of questions about if sharing food was safe, but it seems you know on the research based on the research that I've read. This really is not transmitted through Food, it's you have to be careful about the container you're using and people wiping off the container.

2 (4m 35s):
Once it comes into the house. But like yesterday somebody texted me and said do you have any cardamom and I said yeah come over. So there's a lot more

1 (4m 43s):
sharing. Yeah, I did that with a friend. She left eggs in front of her house and I left half of a roasted leg of lamb that I made.

2 (4m 50s):
Oh, I love

1 (4m 52s):
you. Yeah, it's great. We're getting tons of questions. This is from Patricia Morel act. She asks, like, how is your personal? Cooking change in recent weeks and like for example, are you having to change ingredients that you're used to just having?

2 (5m 7s):
Well, I have always been a champion of the pantry. And so I had a pretty rich Pantry like pretty well-stocked Pantry before so I don't actually feel like I have changed a ton. I'm not I will say like I don't have the plenitude of fresh vegetables that I always have and so there's a lot more like broccoli cauliflower cabbage and the kind of stuff that can last a long time. I sort of work through over the course of the week. But the other thing I will say if that's been very strange in my life. One of the ways I've been affected is I have a historically been known for my huge appetite and the way that look at the coronavirus as like probably emotionally and physically affected me is I don't feel like eating that much right now as much as I cook I sort of just give stuff away most of the time but I'm not like drawn to eating.

2 (5m 55s):
So I'm trying to wrap my mind around how I can share substitution in information with other people have been working on a recipe for cake where you can use whatever you have, you know, but it's hard like it's ours.

1 (6m 7s):
Okay. Here's a question from Marin: Jacob over yet. What advice do you have for people who want to bake bread but can't find flour or Yeast anywhere

2 (6m 17s):
change your desires. I don't know what to tell you about. If you can't find flower. I mean if you're specifically referring to all purpose flour or bread flour that you can't find but say you're able to find whole Flower there are recipes for hundred percent whole wheat bread online in terms of yeast. I think a lot of people have East that are who are hoarding. So look for somebody to borrow from but you can also, you know, it seems daunting and I myself never wanted to do it, but I have like I have over there now my sourdough starter that I feed every day it took me 10 days to get it to come to life and now I'm able to make really beautiful bread.

2 (6m 59s):
So if you want to commit to the The time commitment that's a way to sort of do it without yeast. But then the tricky thing is you have to feed starter flour. So it's complicated. But now I have endless time to stand there and baby my dough so I've started doing it and it's actually really wonderful way to pass the day.

1 (7m 19s):
Thank you for that question. I'm this is this is a question from Jackie Levine. She says we found ourselves a lot of salmon and cabbage presumably frozen salmon any quick and easy advice for those ingredients. Salmon and

2 (7m 30s):
cabbage. Yes. Okay cabbage lately. I've been doing this thing where I take the whole head of cabbage and I slice it into thin slices, maybe an inch and

3 (7m 39s):
a half

2 (7m 40s):
thick and roast them on a sheet pan with whatever flavors I'm feeling. So the original way I had it someone made it for me. He put a ton of butter and like coriander seed and poured some white wine over it and roast it in the oven at about 300 degrees for maybe an hour and a half. And what happens is I think Think we forget we consider cabbage this like really boring depression-era thing. But if cabbage spends time cooking it turns into something completely different it gets so sweet and silky and tender and wants to melt in your mouth. And so I have been making that and with all sorts of different flavors. I made one that was like kind of japanesey with rice wine and sesame seeds and soy sauce that was super good and I think you can reflect whatever is happening on the cabbage on the salmon.

2 (8m 30s):
You slow-cooked salmon where I put it on a sheet

3 (8m 33s):
pan on a piece of parchment skin side

2 (8m 35s):
down just do the whole big piece and I stick it in the oven typically at like 225 or 250. But if you want to just cook the cabbage in the salmon at the same time, it'll be fine at 300 degrees. Also the salmon will take less time than the Cabbage will so get your cabbage started if you're doing the roast inversion and then get that salmon in there and you'll know it's done when the pieces. Has kind of flake apart when you try to touch them because they doesn't really look the same as when we cook salmon on the stove. It kind of stays translucent. It's much more about the

1 (9m 9s):
texture. Yeah, that's my total go to I love this questions from Lucas my ts when this crisis is over. What dish are you going to order to restaurant that you miss? Oh

2 (9m 19s):
man. My favorite restaurant is a Korean restaurant nearby that makes hot tofu soup and is like a stone bowl and they also have these like thin. Cheap pancakes that are so crispy and delicious. I haven't really been ordering any take out. But what I miss is all of the kinds of foods that taste totally different than what I make for myself. I Rely a lot on olive oil and lemon and vinegar. So kind of my food almost all tastes in that Mediterranean, you know flavor palate which is fine and delicious, but I look forward to eating stuff from other parts of the world yesterday. I was really craving Mexican food, I think.

2 (9m 60s):
I'm going to probably make some beans in the next day or two and maybe some tortillas and stuff.

1 (10m 6s):
I love that. Okay, this is from Susie. Wyshak. She says she's got like eight ish year old za'atar spice mix that still smells good, but would you be concerned about using

2 (10m 15s):
it? Oh, no, I wouldn't be concerned about using it. I would taste it. The only thing that would maybe have gone wrong is that the sesame seeds may have turned rancid, but I think as long as it still tastes and smells good. It's totally fine. If you've kept it in a cool dark place. There's totally a chance. At the sesame seeds are still

1 (10m 31s):
fine. This is from Kevin Lindsey. He's getting a lot of charred. What about making a dessert with charred stock?

2 (10m 41s):
The chard stems. You know what that's a kind of amazing. I've never thought I'd invited that question did not go where I thought it was gonna go you really threw me a curveball Kevin. Okay. I have never occurred to me to go sweet with chard stems but I suppose you totally could you know, the thing about rhubarb is that it's so sour and so that really invites sugar whereas to me chard stems are much much. Durand there's I don't really taste the sourness when I try them what I like to do with chard stems like the little yummy treat that I do is I save them until I have a big pile and then I blanch them just until they're tender in boiling water and then I deep fry them.

2 (11m 26s):
So you can just batter them with butter milk and flour and fry them or you could cover them with like, you know, egg and breadcrumb and fry them in the pan and then they're kind of like little French fries. They're really delicious. Here's

1 (11m 36s):
a question from Jennifer Kline Ballina or Veena butter versus olive. Oil when

2 (11m 42s):
saute I don't think there's a versus how much I'm into both. I think it's more about making the decision. That's right for that moment and write for that dish. So I really feel like fat the fat that you start with in a dish determines the final flavor of the dish. So I choose butter when I want something to be extra rich and really to taste sort of more northern European or French and I choose all of oil when I want things to taste Italian when I want things to taste like Come from the Mediterranean, you know, and then I extend that to even things like I when I'm making Indian food I use ghee when I make Korean food I use neutral oil or sesame oil.

2 (12m 23s):
So I really do suggest choosing the fat based on the flavor that you're after

1 (12m 28s):
this is from Russia Rashon Mugen. Do you think that for you personally this moment is going to change the way you cook. I mean there is definitely a something to like dislike a connection that I think Millions of people are kind of making with their with their homes. Right? Like we are in our homes. We have to cook a lot of people baking bread. I mean in some ways like the stuff you write about is to kind of encourage people to make their own food.

2 (12m 54s):
Totally. I actually think one of the greatest things that will come out of this is I think a lot more people will have confidence in the kitchen and feel like they can take care of themselves and they can because now sort of overnight we were all forced. To so people are practicing which the only thing that makes you a better cook is practice. It's not, you know fancy tools or like going to some culinary school. It's just practicing. So now that we all have to make meals, you know, multiple times a day on end for ourselves. And for the people around us. We are all getting better. The other thing I think is kind of the invisible force that helps us become better that a lot of us don't even Eli's is constraint.

2 (13m 43s):
Total freedom is often overwhelming, you know, when you can have any ingredient when you can do anything when you could make any recipe, you don't know where to start you don't have like a path, but when we are constrained by our space or our ingredients or our time or you know, what our kids are going to eat or if they're going to lose their minds like all of those things help us decide what to make and sort of make Choices within our confinement and so I actually think if people can become more comfortable at identifying the constraints and working within them that that also will help later when you go to the farmers market and you're faced with total

1 (14m 26s):
abundance Cimino Strat author Salt Fat acid heat. Thank you so much for being with us. It's just been such a joy having you thank you so much

2 (14m 34s):
for having me of this has been so

1 (14m 35s):
fun. That's an excerpt from my conversation with semi Nusrat the author of Salt

3 (14m 40s):
Fat acid Heat. Eat

1 (14m 41s):
to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this or to NPR's YouTube page when we come back in just a moment. We're going to hear from Alice Waters and our daughter Fanny singer about the future of Chez Panisse and how to grow a victory garden wherever you live stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. hey everyone, just a quick thanks to one of our sponsors who helps make this podcast possible Comcast business Comcast business knows there are times when the need to connect really matters to keep customers and employees in the know and to keep business moving Comcast business is prepared for Times Like These powered by the nation's largest gig Speed network to help give you the speed reliability and security your business needs tools to As your business from any device anywhere and a team of experts here for you 24/7 to learn more go to Comcast business.com.

1 (15m 47s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition. So we just heard from some me Nusrat who actually started her culinary career at Chez Panisse in Berkeley. And her Mentor was none other than Alice Waters Alice and her daughter Fanny singer. Join me to talk about how Chez Panisse is doing during the crisis and how we can keep local farmers and business by buying Straight From the Source Fanny. I know that you are cuz Sheltering in place with your mom right now in Berkeley first of all, how are you guys doing? How are you holding up?

3 (16m 17s):
It's a sort of strange very surreal moment. I live in San Francisco and I do still have an apartment there. But you know, it's a one-bedroom apartment and my partner and I are there together and we both were working at home and there's no outdoor space and being in Berkeley was not just to be with my mom who I obviously was concerned about to just because I wanted to be able to be a sort of insane person about disinfecting mail and you know, like all the things. I'm a little bit more germ Centric than my Others so these things were these were concerns with mine. But also I mean to be in Berkeley in a place that has a really rich outdoor environment and to be able to walk through the mean there are hundred and thirty-seven paths in the hills of Berkeley and to just be able to walk for 10 miles is like the only thing I think kind of keeping me from Total and say hey

1 (17m 7s):
Alice tell us a little bit about what's going on with Chez Panisse right now. Obviously, you've been closed for five maybe six weeks what's going on with a staff right now?

3 (17m 16s):
We really paid the step for their time off so that when it comes time to reopen that they would be there and available. We had the good luck to get a kind of bridge loan from some wonderful friends of the restaurant that are helping us get to the point where money comes from the government to pay people. Some are on unemployment. And some are being paid a portion of their salaries, but it's really important to me that people are paid at the Simon if I have to ask my friends.

3 (18m 1s):
I have doubts my

1 (18m 2s):
friends Alice one of the things I wrote about which is super cool. Is that obviously you work with a lot of small farmers all over California and a lot of these Farmers presumably they Supply restaurants. So first of all from your Relations with with the farmers that you work with who Supply your restaurant and other restaurants. I mean, what is their situation like, I mean, how long can they go like this without having restaurants to supply

3 (18m 26s):
it's very serious what's going on with our whole organic farm community because they really have only the farmers markets to bring food to and the number of people that are going to farmers markets is not what it usually is. So we're trying to figure figure out how to buy that food from the farmers and we have a project in Stockton California. The mayor of Stockton is very enthusiastic about getting organic food into the public school system. And so at this moment in time, he asked if we could help buy food from the farmers so that he can give in Stockton and I That that would be a perfect way for us to begin building that Network that we're going to need for the public schools and we're putting little recipes into the boxes so that people know how to make very simple dishes and we given at least 4,000 pounds of food away and stocked it.

1 (19m 42s):
Well Alice, I mean you've talked about this for years that when you were a little girl your Had a victory garden at home in New Jersey and that you really are encouraging people to plant their own things. You actually inspired me so much. I've got some seedlings here. Can you

3 (19m 56s):
select some bibb lettuce,

1 (19m 59s):
there you go. And I'm going to hopefully that that will be lettuce in a couple of months. I mean, I don't have a big backyard. I don't know. I have a small space. I got a planter but for people who don't have a backyard who might live in an apartment. I mean, what are some ways that people can think about growing their own food

3 (20m 15s):
that keeps looking at? Air France Italy and he started by chanting food out in front of his house in that little Parkway between the sidewalk and the street and it caused a lot of controversy and he actually was cited for violating some ordinates about it and he went to court and he won his case and he actually has planted that whole strip of land so Out of thinking about him. I did the same thing. I dug up that little slot right in front of my house. But I think you can't plant like you have done and planter boxes on a balcony.

3 (21m 1s):
I hope that the Community Gardens began to Surge revised search. I mean, I my mom planted at the little section that's just in front of our house because even though we do have a garden in the back, You wanted people to think about this victory garden moment and the potential for even the most throw away pieces of land. It's now planted with a few different edible things and she's already gotten notes through our mailbox thanking her for taking this kind of action symbolically and encouraging people and you've just seen this proliferation of gardens. Now in people's sort of little forgotten front yards and people sowing seeds all around the neighborhood now and this way that's really incredible.

3 (21m 45s):
I've just never seen anything like Kit

1 (21m 46s):
before you know, one of the things that you've talked about is the idea of buying local produce supporting local farmers, wherever you are in the country around the world and you know, one of the questions that that we're getting an from folks on Facebook to this is from Bell zelazny also, which is what are ways that we can help small farmers are there ways of the places where we can go buy things from them, especially farmers who are used to providing restaurants.

3 (22m 11s):
I think if you are at a loss for who your farmers are do the work of researching Call the pharmacy. Are you having trouble? Are you imperiled is there a way that I can help you even facilitate a network of deliveries? Can I help you deliver but also it might be a question of just helping them figure out logistics or even knowing who they are where their Farms are. I mean I have friends in La the lines were so long that they weren't able to get any food. So they just started figuring out who the Farms were that they could drive out to so they could still got great produce and I needed seeing a little bit more problem solving. And resourceful and also knowing that the farmers are maybe really good at growing vegetables, but don't necessarily know how to work a whole distribution that work and if that's something that you have extra time for facility with like make the effort because they do need

1 (23m 2s):
us. Yeah. I mean totally and you guys have been talking a lot about this by producing this little videos in your kitchen. What are you guys cooking right now? That is giving you just a comfort in this at this time.

3 (23m 12s):
Well, I feel like coming home pasta, which we've rebranded. As always home pasta coming home pasta was a recipe that we would make whenever we come back from a long trip to kind of feel oriented back in our house and it's totally a pandemic recipe garlic chili things that are preserved little Capers movies and parsley if you have it and we've been eating coming on pasta at least once a week and it's a real it's a there's something very homey about it, but it's also something that feels very achievable right now, but I even trying to make these recipes that also stretch things. That make use of one ingredient over long period it's both satisfying and necessary and also sort of comforting to know what your meals are going to look like over the

1 (23m 56s):
course of a week. Yeah, never before in living memory for most people is has have we spent such a concentrated amount of time at home with our families and like the two of you spending all this time together. Like when was the last time the two of you spent such a concentrated amount of time together? I mean the relationship with her. Thomas's is also change because we're spending so much time here.

3 (24m 20s):
Well, I mean we've got on some occasional longer trip, so it's not untrod territory. But this is definitely a more durational experience of it. And it's also it's in our homes were not somewhere else experiencing new stimulation. We're very much in this place which is why you know, I you know, this book that I wrote which was about the more figurative relationship to home instructs also and how to be comfortable in your actual home how to to feel like there's a Change of Atmosphere from a put one room to the next if you burn a branch of dried rosemary, you reset the smell that plays or my mom is always putting on a stock. I mean, she'll do that wherever we are but like now there's this almost like ritual chicken stock once a week and the way that just marks time in your weak to even to prepare things that you have a very sensitive relationship to it's like picking a rose or a flower or something outside that you can smell that will give A little bit of a shift of atmosphere which I think you know, these are things that I talked about who's more like abstract way that are now like actual tools that we feel like we're using all the time.

1 (25m 26s):
Yeah, before we go Alice in five years time from now when we talk about this period And I say to you, what was the thing that you took away from this period or that that allowed you to build more resilience into what you do? What do you want that to be?

3 (25m 39s):
I don't want to take anything for granted. I want to really be in prison. What time and it's so important to my everyday lives that I am somehow connected to Nature and what I'm eating and Tivoli pause to light the candles at the table and really feel grateful. I think that's something that I will always

1 (26m 9s):
feel. I love it Alice Danny. Thank you so much for joining us been so great having

3 (26m 15s):
you. You so much. That's an excerpt from my

1 (26m 18s):
conversation with Alice Waters founder of Chez Panisse and her daughter Fanny singer. The author of always home to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them at youtube.com NPR we're going to be putting these episodes into your podcast feed every week and hosting the conversations in real time at noon Eastern nine Pacific on Twitter Youtube and Facebook they happen every Wednesday and Friday sometimes five days a week. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual and PR events. You can go to NPR presents dot-org.

1 (26m 58s):
This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney, neba Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and we'll see you right here next week. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.