2 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. So I've never asked you for much. This show is free and we think about it as kind of like a free MBA program each week. We bring you the stories of failure Triumph pivot strategic challenges mishaps and problem-solving from some of the world's greatest entrepreneurs and it's all free and always will be but now I'm asking you to consider buying my new book based on this show. It's called how I built this. And it only costs about 20 bucks and this book is designed for anyone who's thinking of building something or just wants to be inspired by people who have built some of the most iconic companies and brands on Earth.

2 (42s):
And if you preorder it now like in the next few days, I will send you a free signed bookplate. So please go to how I built this.com or guy rise.com to order the book and get your free signed book plate. Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes. We talked with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders about how they're coping during this very challenging time. And today we're going to hear from Sandra ol in the founder and CEO of kiwi Co chirico makes arts and science projects for kids and ships them out in monthly subscription boxes or crates in March when students began learning from home Sandra's company saw a spike in orders, and it's now a Over 20 million boxes around the world.

2 (1m 34s):
I spoke with Sandra from her home in the Bay Area where she's trying to keep up with demand. Tell us a little bit more about kiwi Co for people who don't know what what you do tell us about your

3 (1m 44s):
company. Yeah, so we design and we deliver Hands-On experiences for kids kids of all ages. So we have different types of experiences and products that we develop for newborns and infants all the way through to two kids at heart so teens and even grown-ups and these Hands-On experiences. They range so science experiments games that kids making play projects that encourage imaginative play and are all centered around this idea of how can we encourage kids to see themselves as

2 (2m 16s):
makers and I think the pride of best-known product is the Kiwi crate and inside like you get pipe cleaners and different, you know, like styrofoam balls and I think that's probably the best-known product that you guys

3 (2m 30s):
A great the Kiwi crate. Yeah, I mean that's our Flagship line. So kiwi crate is geared for Early Elementary age kids. So ages 5 to 8, and it's very project-based for kiwi crate. There are at least two different projects and it's usually one that's not a science and engineering Focus project and one that's going to be more of an art and creativity design Focus project. So let's say one project overall. It's about arcades and one project might be you create a mechanical arcade claw that you can actually grab. Grab things with and the other side of the crate might be a project where you're making your own yarn pom pom creatures and then you're actually taking your claw and you try to grab those creatures as well as whatever else is around your house too.

3 (3m 12s):
So, it's this combination of discoveries along with hopefully a little bit of delight and a whole bunch of

2 (3m 18s):
fun which I love and tell me I know that you launched this in 2011 and at the time I guess you were like you were in charge of the fashion portfolio for eBay head of the eye. Yeah, come to you. This is it was

3 (3m 32s):
born mainly at a personal need so my career has spanned consumer products and Technology mostly e-commerce. So it's starting my career and R&D at Procter & Gamble and then had been at PayPal and eBay, but when we started the company, so 2011 my kids. My oldest two kids were almost three and almost five and I really wanted to give them exposure to Hands-On activities it was Is a way for them to really see themselves as producers and not just kind of passive consumers as kids who could actually kind of problem solve and make something and so I started to pull together different materials and inspiration and I was like, oh my gosh, it's taking a long time.

3 (4m 16s):
Like I need to amortize my effort. And so I would invite my friends and their kids and one of the moms actually said you should start a business around this and it was one of those things where I think long story short Is that we found that there are a lot of parents who are well-intentioned very busy. They want enriching activities for their kids and if they can come to them in a convenient format from a trusted brand and that's something that actually really resonates and then if you think about it from a business perspective, if you can get a subscription service to work, it works really well, right. And so if you consider all the elements of a subscription service or you're considering lifetime value, if you're able to drive down your cost of acquisition, then you're able to provide Something that is not only valuable to the customer but ends up being something that works really well on the business side to

2 (5m 7s):
I imagine when the real estate business for a moment. I mean, I imagine that when it became clear the pandemic was going to shut down huge part of the economy, like most business owners. You probably anticipated a downturn for your business. And first of all, how did you prepare for that possibility

3 (5m 24s):
well to be completely Frank it was a little bit of Madness and say kind of the beginning so we were A little bit ahead of the curve and having folks work remotely. But then as people started to shelter in place. It was definitely a scramble, you know, we have to see what the impact would be to the business. And so we definitely became more conservative. So very quickly we decided to basically pull back or remain conservative on marketing spend. We were looking at things like hiring and figuring out what we want to do that so we held on hiring but then we're also tracking the business and What we actually started to see pretty quickly is a pretty decent uptick in the business.

3 (6m 6s):
I think the combination of parents being home needing something to engage kids. We happen to be a good solution. And so we started to see an uptick in the business and then accordingly had to manage the business based on that demand

2 (6m 21s):
and a pretty dramatic uptick. I think right.

3 (6m 23s):
Yeah. So I think you'd mention guy kind of in the beginning that we shipped out over 20 million crates now. So if you look at kind of the first ten million crates, we hit that Mark actually in January 2019 and then in the next like 18 months or so, we actually ship that another 10 million crates and you can imagine kind of the acceleration of the business and some of that is because of the acceleration that we saw in the business given the pandemic and the demand that was

2 (6m 51s):
there. I'm not surprised. We spoke with the CEO of DreamBox who told us that they have seen a doubling of I onboarding onto their platform. It's a math. A platform for elementary school kids I spoke to Sal Khan a few days ago of the founder of the Khan Academy. I mean, they're seeing record numbers of students on their platform mean as you have seen this kind of surge in demand, how have you been able to meet that demand? I mean, for example, have you had any challenges sourcing supplies?

3 (7m 21s):
Yeah. So we've definitely had different challenges associated with with meeting the name and I think the great thing is that our team has been incredibly responsive. And making sure that we are Shoring up our supply chain putting in the appropriate orders to make sure that we have the inventory available and I think when it's kind of regular times to a certain extent, it's almost like your utilities or you know, you expect the water to be there in the electricity work and similarly you expect that you're going to have product to ship and so we had to be very proactive about making sure that some of these things that we maybe have taken for granted and past were there and available to us that we could actually serve the community. Filament was definitely another area that we had to really Shore up and make sure that we had the capacity and then customer care.

3 (8m 8s):
I mean, obviously we want to do an excellent job of serving the customer and making sure that their questions are answered Etc. And so there was a certain amount of capacity that we were planning for in march-april ETC May June. And so we had actually scale that up pretty significantly. I'm let's go to some

2 (8m 28s):
questions for getting in from folks watching this is from Kyle. Zimmer he asks by Twitter. How do you develop your kids? And how do you test them with

3 (8m 36s):
kids? Yeah, so we have interestingly kind of to product design and development teams. So we have a physical product design and development team and then we have a digital. So the digital is creating the e-commerce platform or content platform. So the software and then our physical product design team is really comprised of folks with mechanical engineering backgrounds industrial design we have Someone who actually worked on space satellite systems that and so these are the folks who are concepting the different projects that get sent out to the kids prototyping testing Etc and a big part of what we've done at chirico even since you started it in my garage actually is that we are always testing with children.

3 (9m 20s):
So in every office that we've had we have a sizable room and four to eight times a week kids are coming in to test the products at various stages and that is something that is absolutely critical for us. We may assume that a project may be engaging in may not we may assume that a material is something that is malleable enough for preschoolers hands, but it may not be and so it's just a critical step and so as we've actually been working remotely that was a big challenge to figure out and so it's been pretty amazing. We quickly decided to actually purchase 3D printers laser cutters Etc that we then distributed to different product designers.

3 (10m 0s):
And then on the testing side, we ended up actually either shipping or having hand off locations for kids to pick up and test the materials and then do them via video conference. And so we actually asked for a different camera angles to see what the kids are doing because depending on the age of the kid, it's not so much that they're going to tell you what's going on. You actually have to observe what's going on. And so that's definitely been an area where we've had to figure out how to get things done. Done and this environment

2 (10m 31s):
when we come back in just a moment Sandra talks about how kiwi Co is trying to make sure that it reaches all types of kids with all types of abilities. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition and I'm speaking with Sandra Oh Lynne.

2 (11m 14s):
She's the founder of kiwi Co the company sends out subscription boxes to kids with all kinds of arts and science projects. We're getting some questions about diversity and encouraging diversity in stem. Rachel cracked asks, what role did the growth of women in stem impact the creation of kiwi Co another question about how do you make sure that that the crates are culturally relevant to encourage?

3 (11m 39s):
Re in stem. Yeah, absolutely. So when we create our Crepes, we believe that it's really important that there are Universal and that they are not gender-specific or racially specific. We were very very intentional about that. And even when we talk about testing with children, we make sure that we're testing with a lot of different children different ages different genders Etc different capabilities. In addition to that. I think for sure I think these days Days one thing that is on many people's minds are just the socio-economic divides and the fact that as we were coming out of the last school year and we look at children who are disadvantaged.

3 (12m 21s):
They were maybe something like 7 to 10 months behind and so as we're going into this school year and we continue to see this divide. Really? Why didn't I think there is this good question of what is it that we can do as kiwi Co what role can we help play? And we're trying to figure that out. And so we have started to try to partner with certain organizations to be able to provide these experiences for disadvantaged youth children of color, but there's definitely a lot more to do there. But knowing that some of these kids don't have access to the internet don't have access to some of the platforms that they need to continue to learn having something that is Hands-On can be helpful to them.

3 (13m 5s):
So we are still figuring that

2 (13m 6s):
out one of the cool things that I read about something. Guys said this summer you launched a camp, right? I mean a lot of kids second home, or maybe they were going outside to a park but you know, not a whole lot of interaction with other kids you launch this virtual Camp, which basically from what I understand was designed to like basically occupy kids for a good chunk of the day. How did it

3 (13m 27s):
work? Hmm and this actually also links to to your previous question about how can we serve kind of kids across the board? And so what we discovered I'll get into the Even just a second what we discovered right as the pandemic hit is that folks really needed resources around how to actually encourage their kids to learn from home. So that first weekend in March our team came together and basically built a resource Hub the resource Hub included things like kid-friendly explanations as to what was going on, right? So the signs behind hand washing or how the virus is actually spread and so When we actually launched that resource Hub, we actually crashed her sight.

3 (14m 12s):
We sent out the email announcing it demonstrating that there was quite a bit of a need there. And then for the summer then guy kind of to your point. We said what else can we do for the summer that I mean the summer is going to look unlike any other summer but yet we knew that there was still fun and discoveries to be had and so we pulled together Camp. Chirico. So there are four different week-long sessions for kids of all ages and is important to us to make that actually available for free. And that was again something that was important because we were positioned in a way and we had the assets to be able to pull that together for the community

2 (14m 46s):
sounds like it was a product of necessity right? We're here in this pandemic and sounds like a creative idea that came up had you wanted to launch something like this in a normal year. It would have taken, you know year of planning and meetings and right and marketing strategies and all these things and and I imagine you just kind of put it out there. But is this something that you can imagine doing for good like is this something that is Part of your core strategy now.

3 (15m 11s):
I mean we did learn a lot from it. And so I do think that going for a we will continue to create content for kids and for families. I mean, these are the times when the team comes together and they scramble and they build something and I think to a certain extent being able to come together and create something like Camp Keiko was actually something that was really exciting but gave us kind of a sense of purpose and a mission that really kind of This together and and helped us actually even get through these times.

2 (15m 43s):
Yeah, given the fact that most kids are doing school from home. What are some of the things that parents should kind of keep in mind when it comes to supporting their kids not only this sort of the interface with a computer but you know non-computer activity what what are some suggestions that you have?

3 (15m 59s):
Yeah. I think that when it comes to stem and steam if you think about it, it is the foundation for things. It's how the world. Actually works and what's kind of awesome is that you now have an opportunity to engage with your child in the world in your home around your home and I think there's so many topics that are relevant today that can help a child think through learn things but also to kind of help them in terms of critical thinking or problem-solving. So whether it is as I mentioned just talking about the pandemic and how viruses spread or what people are doing, you know these days in terms of medicines and things like that. Or even talking about things like civics or how do elections work.

3 (16m 43s):
I think there are so many opportunities with things that are going on in the real world today to be able to engage your child engage in conversation again, hopefully help pique their curiosity. So as they grow they're able to build the creative confidence to be able to engage in those topics Sandra. Do you

2 (17m 0s):
think that's cool we'll ever I don't will ever return to normal the way it was in January and February of

3 (17m 6s):
2020. It's a good question guy. Why I think that the world has changed I think the context in which we operate and including school will evolve and change based on experiences that we've had. I imagined to a certain extent that some people will actually choose to continue to homeschool their children. So there actually may be a shift there or I think that there's an opportunity to really look at the partnership between the school and really the Educators at home. Maybe the parents or the Guardians as well. And so I think there could be some interesting things that happen there. I mean the rise of the different softwares you mentioned DreamBox etcetera and how they're actually helping consumers is really fascinating to think about too.

3 (17m 52s):
So I think that it will change it's a matter of how it'll actually

2 (17m 56s):
change. But when I asked you to put on your entrepreneurs hat for just a moment. I mean you started this business in 2011, when a friend of yours is like Sandra, this is amazing. You should go and do that. Right and that happens a lot. I mean, I'm sure people watching this or listening. Going to this have experienced that where friend like tries their pasta dish and says you need to sell this or whatever. It might be and most of us don't don't do it. Right. We don't like quit our jobs and don't start something. What's your advice for people who are thinking about turning their interests and hobbies into a business

3 (18m 28s):
venture. I mean, I think one of the things that was really important for me as I was thinking about launching kiwi Co is ensuring that this was not an N equals one demand. You need to if you're thinking about launching a business and certainly if you're thinking about launching hopefully will be a decent sized business. You want to make sure that there's an addressable Market that's actually big enough to capture what it is that you're putting out into the world and so early on I was very very interested in talking to Consumers. So I did qualitative focus groups in my living room and my friends living rooms all So did surveys actually got thousands of responses across the u.s.

3 (19m 13s):
Because they also recognize that I live in a certain area with maybe certain perspectives. And so that was really important to do too. And so I'd say, you know being very customer focused really considering the market and seeing how your product or service that you want to put out there actually resonates is something that is pretty critical and I think you learn a ton of stuff along the way around how to shape your That's what you end up deciding to do. Awesome

2 (19m 42s):
sand role in CEO founder of key week. Oh, thank you so much. It's a

3 (19m 46s):
pleasure. Thanks so much for having me. That's an

2 (19m 48s):
excerpt for my conversation with Sandra ol in the founder and CEO of chirico to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this and click on videos. And if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR and if you want to find out more about the how I built this Resilience series and join us live or other virtual NPR events. You can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Matt Adams Gianna, Kappa, Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you back here in a few days.

2 (20m 28s):
I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this from NPR.