0 (0s):
Hey, it's Guy here. And before we start the show, I haven't asked. So this year has been hard and kind of overwhelming from the pandemic to the economic crisis, to the demonstrations against racial injustice, to the election. On top of an economic downturn, that's left millions of people without work. So many of us have experienced loneliness, anxiety, fear, depression, sometimes the whole at once. And when it started to become clear that this year would be unlike any year, any of us have ever experienced our team on how I built this, decided to figure out how we could be there for you, because not only did we want to continue to bring you stories that might inspire you or push you to keep going, but we also want it to remind you that you're not alone.

0 (53s):
This year, we've produced more than 100 total episodes. That's more episodes than all of mad men or all of breaking bad. And we did that this year alone. Each episode of how I built this is painstakingly researched carefully. Fact-checked edited and re edited multiple times scored with original music and mastered to a sound quality that very few other podcasts even bother with. And we do it not just because we love what we do, but because we truly love how, what we make makes your life a little better. We make how I built this for you.

0 (1m 34s):
And if our show brings some meaning and joy and inspiration to your life, please consider making a donation to your local NPR member station. How I built this airs on hundreds of stations across a U S and those stations need your help to continue to provide great content for free. And so if you are able, I hope you can contribute to the work that they do. You can go to donate.npr.org/built and give directly to a local NPR station. That's donate dot NPR dot org slash built. And thank you.

0 (2m 19s):
Hey everyone. And welcome to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR. And these episodes we're hearing from entrepreneurs and business leaders about how they've been building resilience into their businesses during this very challenging year. And today we're going to hear it from Daniela Corrente CEO and co founder of Reel. It's a digital platform that makes saving money easier. It helps people make big purchases like furniture or electronics or clothing without taking on credit cards.

1 (2m 47s):
I think a lot of these as a society, we've always been told that shopping is fun, right? When you're stressed you shop, when you want to have fun, you're a joke savings. It's scary, right? Savings, its for that have a lot of money. We haven't been done to see the potential of our own cash flows. People are driven by emotion, right? You and I, we all liked to realize that they were rational beings, but when it comes to numbers, a lot of the limitations that we may come from an emotional place. And that's really where we are. We all came through the I. Where are you seeing that behavioral knowledge to bring an experience of savings? That's relatable for people.

0 (3m 24s):
So it's a savings platform, but can you explain how it works?

1 (3m 28s):
Yeah, of course. So let's say that you want a new microphone.

0 (3m 31s):
This microphone is amazing. This one, not so much,

1 (3m 34s):
Right? You know, you want a new microphone that say that he is $300 and you come to our website and we put $5 a day and you can have it in a decent amount of time and you play with it, connect your bank account. And we automatically start moving money from your bank account towards your goal. As you are saving or sending you a load of reinforcement with tell you that are amazing. And you're a grade you're going to achieve your goals without going into that, you can share it with your friends. You can boost that if there is a deal and a microphone, we notify you. And once you complete savings, all that you have to do is confirm your shipping address and we place the order on your behalf. So it's a full circle from the moment that you want it to your microphone, to a moment that you're interviewing me with your microphone,

0 (4m 16s):
You guys partner with some big name, brand businesses like Bloomingdale's and some others. And is that how it works? Like you basically go on your website and you identify products on the website that you need, or maybe you don't need, but you just want, and that's, that's what you start to save towards

1 (4m 35s):
So that you can come in to the website and start saving for whatever you want. And that's actually connected with the 2020 story that I'm sure we'll get into soon. We also aggregate inventory from thousands of stores. So we serve as an aggregator where we, you know, scrape the web and present with possibilities of items based on what you have like before. And we are starting to do direct partnerships with retailers. So we bought at a good point of purchase instead of putting something, when a wishlist and not taking action, I to actually start saving for things as their shopping. Daniela

0 (5m 7s):
How did you come up with the idea?

1 (5m 9s):
It was born of a personal fascination with the consumer finance. I was the first one in my family to move to the States. I moved here for college and you know, the early two thousands, if you had a book and you go to a credit card and that was a way that he was right, we didn't know any better. I had gotten my credit card. He was a $2,000 credit card. I loved it. I thought I want to be a thousand dollar Reacher. I amen. I mean, funny side story. I even sponsored a child by and I thought I had so much money that I went to a UNICEF that come and sponsor a child for $18 a month. I was just like, I got to a thousand dollar limit. I know, of course I had no idea where it was. Right. And then really quickly understood what the high interest that I had men.

1 (5m 55s):
And why do you need to be late and became fascinated with financial psychology and why as humans, we make decisions that we make 'cause. We asked to stay in happiness with a certain lifestyle and to have that lifestyle is connected with money. Now, is that a fascination that I had for years, but I didn't do anything with it until, you know, a couple of years ago. And that came out of just working in advertising in New York at a client brief that who's now my co-founder was working on <inaudible> and you know, we were chatting one day and he told me, Hey, do you actually know that a millennial set up avoiding credit card? And obviously this is for 13 years after my $3,000 fiasco.

1 (6m 39s):
And I'm like, wait, hold on. What, what happened? What happened in these years that I haven't been paying attention to consumer finance and I put up a survey monkey and sent questions as a marketer. I'm curious, not what the intention of starting a company with the intention of understanding the market and you know, the really fascinating answers about what people are telling me. Like, look, I don't know how to say, I want to say, but it seems too complicated. It seems too stressful. It with the years of just selling products to consumers more on the retail side, I started really thinking about it and how can we connect these feeling of excitement would savings and everything started rippling from there.

1 (7m 28s):
I, I had to go out to South by Southwest for work and my co-founder too. And we worked up about this idea and I was asking every single friend at this time, how are you paying for things what's going on? What has changed? And I remember vividly just having dinner and telling my co-founder, Hey, if you're going to South by Southwest, there are a lot of people there. I can put a Squarespace website and to bring the business cars and we can go on, talk about a base and see if people would like it. And that's how I go to my first investor meeting.

0 (8m 3s):
When you started to meet with investors and pitch, the idea is every person who has been and how I built this as described, I'm sure you got some pushback. I'm sure people are saying, well, why would somebody do that? And not just go to a, an interest bank account? Or why would somebody, you know, do that and not do layaway? Or why wouldn't somebody just get a low-interest credit card, right? I mean, what kind of pushback did you get?

1 (8m 23s):
You know, the title of the show has the word Resilience and then I think every single founder that you've interview a fundraising, it's always a full on a story on itself, right? Because you get no more times than you get a yes, but you only need a handful of yes. In order to change the trajectory of your story. And you know, when, especially when it's a product that it's not relatable necessarily, I mean, to the investors, right? Because they don't need to set money aside for our butts because they don't need to set money aside for the new microphone or, or the new computer. So beta was a really important in this journey that has been fundraising, right?

1 (9m 3s):
Proving that pay, there is a need in the market. I proving then the customer that we're after, he's a customer that can then again, spend highly. So we go to a lot of pushback as far as questions about understanding consumer behavior. And that's actually what I'm very passionate about. It was very fun and it keeps being a very fun to involve the story overtime with the learning that we're having, not only from the hypotheses that we had originally buy it for our current customers.

0 (9m 33s):
I know you raised, I think about a million and a half dollars, right? Is that right

1 (9m 38s):
Now we raise close to five, five.

0 (9m 39s):
Oh my gosh. I'm S that was getting that initial funding. Was that really hard?

1 (9m 48s):
Yes. You know, I come from a family of entrepreneurs, so These mentality of you adapt and you learn and you get feedback and you figure out a way to play on that feedback to make things happen, have been really influential on the way that I've evolved the company and that I have gone about every fundraising round. But I do remember right when at the beginning it was like, Oh my goodness. If we get $10,000, this is all of that we can do. And now it's just like $10,000. No, we need to keep growing. Right? Yeah. It was actually the first money that we got came from outside of our own money, of course, right. Savings freelancing for one gaze and just putting our own money and sweating through.

1 (10m 33s):
The reason is that they came from my next set, a writer and we went through the front of accelerators and there was one which is a Walker that I really, really liked because of the way that they structure their investments. And I remember going to that meeting with one of the managing partners and sitting down, and I'm like, where does the, and we'd all of, all of these alerts accelerator, and this is why I like these ones. And if you are gonna make a decision, we need to work into these pretty fast because we have all these other conversations. But Neil getting to that level of confidence took the time. Right. But he was pretty much on the phase and they believe in us and they were our first choice and it just got the full bed growth for us.

1 (11m 14s):
But it took a while. It wasn't, it wasn't something that it took two days, three days, not even a couple of it took months because at the beginning, and I'm sure a lot of entrepreneurs listening to this at the beginning, sort of like the chicken and the egg question, right? It's like, well, and this is the idea that you have, show me, prove that the market wants that. But in order to show you proof that the market wants it at scale, their needs to be some level of investment. So you're playing with that data in order to deliver a high quality story that they can buy into it.

0 (11m 44s):
I mean, we live in as you know, cause I, I should mention you were born and raised in Venezuela, right? And the United States is like, people are constantly debt and I don't even know what the numbers are. It's and saying, and, and people have multiple credit cards on our show. We interview founders who max out their credit cards to start their businesses. Right. But the idea behind this is to prevent that is to essentially, I guess, to discourage people from just putting things on credit cards when they don't have the cash to pay for it,

1 (12m 11s):
There is that on, there is unnecessary that, and we are highly focused on the debt that he's on necessarily the right things that you might not need right away. And why are you going to get into that for him? Like, I'll give you an example. I got a lot of our users are first-time moms. When you're a first time mom on you're going to eat a stroller. You don't need it for another 10 months, nine months. Why are you going to rack on your debt to go for that? Right? When you need a new computer or other furniture or even a trailer, we have a lot of customers that have started savings for a trip. Why don't you start putting on you a bit of money aside every day. So then by the time that you get there, you're going to achieve your goal without having to go in to that. I think it as a society, the biggest thing is that people do not understand the implications that own in a society that has been the long term, but it has changed tremendously after a year after 2008.

1 (13m 3s):
And now we're seeing a lot of that too. Every, every financial downturn brings new behavior.

0 (13m 9s):
When we come back in just a moment, more of my conversation with Daniela Corrente in, How adding a service fee to her free platform, actually increased users, stayed with us and Guy rise. And you're listening to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Western governors university, ready to earn your degree, but needs a university that works with your schedule. WGU is programs are built to be flexible with no set log-in times and 24 seven access to most coursework. You can earn a respected bachelor's or master's degree on your schedule.

0 (13m 49s):
Listeners of this podcast can have the $65 application fee waived, learn more at wgu.edu/how I built this. And just a reminder this month is NPR annual end of year fundraising campaign. So please go to donate.npr.org/built to support your local station. And thanks. Hey, welcome back to how I built this Resilience addition. And I'm talking with Daniela Corrente CEO and co founder of Reel. When Reel initially launched, it was a free service, but Daniela found herself fielding lots of questions from skeptical customers about how the company made money.

1 (14m 35s):
When we started with a product, we were a free product and the reason I'm bringing this up, because I think the pricing psychology is fascinating. And you know, we were in a new company and people would call us, email us, like, why are you free? Where are you free? Where's the garage. And this is my new bridge and a lady Guy era. Right? So what are you doing? And so me and my co-founder, we sat down. We're like, okay, we're spending a lot of time responding to people and explaining how we make money and talking to our investors. They were like, Hey, why don't you charge? And this is not where we want for our product. So we actually were like, let's AB test the, and we did.

1 (15m 15s):
And we saw higher conversion when we started charging a fee for use the platform, which was fascinating. So we started charging a fee at two, use the platforms, so higher conversion, so higher and trust, which makes perfect sense because we live in the era of Airbnb and door dash, right on, people use a service fee. So right now we're currently a B tests in removing that fee again, because we want to add value for customers over a time. And that's something that goes against. They believe that we have as a company, we believe that they should be a free product for our customers, but it definitely as everything well, building a company, it's been a learning curve. Right. Okay.

0 (15m 56s):
How does Reel make money? What's your revenue.

1 (15m 58s):
Yeah. So we wanted to dissect couple of different ways. So we wanted guys obviously in the morning that they weren't holding on behalf of the users. Right? And then we also wanted dies through partnerships with retailers because we're driving traffic doors, their website, right. We're driving conversion. And so we get paid for that.

0 (16m 15s):
Daniela, let's talk about 2020. This year has been unlike any year in living memory, obviously for some sectors, it's been really challenging, incredibly challenging, the restaurant industry and travel and leisure, the service industry, even retail apparel. It's been a really tough and obviously for small businesses, how, how have you guys been doing this year? I know you've got a team of about 20 people. So presumably you're working in a distributed way. I mean, what are you seeing? What are, I mean, are presumably people can save more money cause they're not traveling. They're not going to restaurants for example.

1 (16m 55s):
Yes. So there are a couple of things there, right? 2020 has definitely been a very interesting year. I think that's entrepreneurs. If every year we, we grow at a five X because of everything that we learned this year is like a 20 X exponential growth is not only running your business, but setting new structures or your team to work remotely too. Right. For us because he saved to buy the, actually everything that has happened with COVID and it has accelerated These behavior of people to look for alternatives. Right? If you look into data, people are saving now more than ever. I mean, of course they are, are saving more because you are not going out and the underlying their it's the behavior over the time.

1 (17m 38s):
And you happen after 2008, you could see how millennials had less credit cards. Then the previous generation, because they saw what their parents went through right now, with everything that's happening with COVID where seeing that people are realizing that living paycheck to paycheck is not the way to go for it at the same time is that you're out of Instagrams and thick dogs. And there it's a lifestyle that you wanted to achieve. So finding that balance, it's something that is playing a very nicely in our advance because of the product that we're putting in the market. So we've actually seen a tremendous amount of growth of these year, month, over a month, as far as the daughter is transacted, I need to also ask, are we sold off of us, expanding into multiple verticals.

1 (18m 25s):
We we'd meet and have to necessarily pilot as a company, but accelerate our offerings. Right? When the year started, we were offering perhaps to three verticals. And then when these happened in March, we sat down to the team and we said, Hey, look, you know, most of our people are saving for fashion and furniture and things that, you know, might not be needed right now. We need to expand. So if they want to save for, for electronics, if they want to say for a tag, if they want to say for all the things we need to offer that, and we kind of do it in Q3 or Q4, we need to do it in early Q2. How are we going to have a release as a team? And so it was a period of being very hands-on down to business, right?

1 (19m 8s):
Developing sort of alternatives for people to save. And it has paid off over time.

0 (19m 14s):
I want to jump to a question we got from Sandeep via LinkedIn, Sandy Basques have you considered offering options for people to save, to donate to charity?

1 (19m 25s):
I actually a great question because we just did that last week. So people can save for charities that they want to. And that came out honestly from our partnership with some influencers where they asked us, Hey, look, I want to share these with my following, but I want to make sure that we also have the opportunity to say for these charities and we open that possibility. So absolutely you can do that.

0 (19m 49s):
Here's another question from Sebastian, Sebastian S what do you say to people who, who asked, you know, why wouldn't I just open up a savings account instead of using Reel like he asks, what does Reel offer that makes it a more viable offering?

1 (20m 3s):
Yeah. So look, savings accounts. I've been there for ages and ages, right? You can go do any bank and institution and just create a savings account and put a picture of whatever you want. The reality is that the younger generation doesn't only have friction with certain financial integrations overtime, but it's looking for ways to sort of optimize their, their experiences, right? When you, if you put money on a savings account, you have to track it. You have to track the product that you're saving for. Right? You have to make sure that there is enough money on your account. Every time you make the transfer. If you come to us, we facilitate all that for you, right? If you come to us, you tell us when you won and we have a team that looks for sales for you.

1 (20m 46s):
It's very easy for to share these with your friends. It's very easy for you, Sebastian, if you make an extra 50 bucks this weekend to put it towards your goal, right? And there is also the aspect of the constant transparency on this is when you have, this is what you are hitting. If you don't have a ton of money in your bank, we will not make a transaction. So there is a lot of advantages of using those as a service, because it's not only that we are helping you to say where they can use through a journey to make sure you achieve your goals.

0 (21m 14s):
It's interesting because you know, services like betterment or Wealthfront and the sort of a robo advisors, they have a similar model, which is goal oriented. Like you've got different buckets where you could save for college or a new home or whatever it is. Do you think that goal oriented saving is the new model for a younger consumers?

1 (21m 34s):
I think about it, right? Like as humans, we think about the lifestyle that we want to have, and money is a means to a one man. Right? When you talk about your trip next year, with your friends, you're thinking about the experiences that you're going to have, not the, perhaps the a thousand dollars and you need to set aside to get towards a tree, right? So definitely not. I mean, understanding that the majority of consumers there is for half of a 5% of customers that feel very comfortable connecting a bank account, feel very comfortable with numbers and, and then they can go one set up a savings on, we don't mind or a savings account with a product that is very numbers driven. Then if you are talking about masses, right, masses are you used to being targeted with the lifestyle, right?

1 (22m 18s):
But not on how you achieve that lifestyle. And so that's been a goal-oriented, it's the way to go when it comes to savings, because it aligns with the reality of digital world where we're consuming the lifestyle that we want. 24 seven in our devices.

0 (22m 35s):
You mentioned how you responded to consumer demand by creating new verticals for new categories of products, because obviously people have been saving more this year. What has been the financial impact of the pandemic on your business? Has it, have you seen a drop off, have you seen an increase in revenue? What, what, what have you seen so far?

1 (22m 56s):
So look, we saw a big increase on dollars transacted. And the reason why that is very interesting to us is because by expanding to other verticals, we started also getting more of the share of wallet from the customers that we are also already had. So not only attracting new customer base, but also telling our customers, Hey, you know, now you can start saving for your Christmas budget with the us, not only, you know, the, the TV are not only the computers. So we started seeing more of a three 60 in to the lives of our customer, as far as purchases. What was very interesting for us in March, which was something that made us sort of rethink the way that we see the business in certain ways is that when going to happen will be some people that started, they kept saving, but they didn't want to play the orders right away.

1 (23m 49s):
That that was fascinating to us because we saw the savings is transacted, get the same. And then on the contrary, they increased tremendously like November of 24% higher than the previous month, right? So it's increasing in a very rapid pace. However, This sells people that are like, you know what, actually, instead of placing that order of the shoes, can I try and for These to a computer, it's going to take me a little bit longer to get there, but I want to say for those things, how can I transfer These to furniture of furniture and electronics? What is something that increased tremendously on the platform as well as travel, because obviously it's new ride. So then we still have that behavior of people moving money around more than never, in fact, over 20% of the items and people would save for it.

1 (24m 35s):
They transfer in between items because there is this element of gamification on your savings. Yeah. That has resonated really good with our demographic.

0 (24m 44s):
I have a couple of minutes left and I want to get to at least one more question from our listeners. The, this one is from Robin Davies, by a Facebook, Robin asks what's been the biggest driver of awareness for Reel. What are you, how are you reaching new customers? How are you finding new people to use your service? Because that's the most expensive part of a startup is right. It's a user acquisition in a time when we're all kind of stuck at home and everyone is now using digital marketing. How are you reaching customers?

1 (25m 13s):
So if there are a couple of different ways, I think one thing that I would put out there for every entrepreneur it's think about organic loops and how can you leverage your own customers to spread the word to others? So how, how do you leverage the fact that they like your brand so they can tell others and begin having that ripple effects? So we've got to our customers are different ways, obviously because of the nature of our savings platform, we promote our product to Instagram, right? And we promote our product for Facebook to place where people are looking for aspiration, right? And in fact, we have a customer is a great, like one of our reviews, she called us her actionable Pinterest.

1 (25m 53s):
She was like in Pinterest, I put things on my board. When you guys I'm actually putting money towards what I want, which I love that. And then besides spade, obviously our own channels, email, and it's a great source of conversion for us. And then all of these organic groups, and then ask me to look into 2021 and expanding into a distribution channels. We have a couple of really great partnerships that are coming into play. I cannot say now, but then we'll start being one at the point of purchase and that on logs, a different distribution channel for us,

0 (26m 25s):
It's an excerpt from my live conversation with Daniela Corrente CEO and co founder of Reel to see our full live interview, you can go to facebook.com/how I built this. And if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can also find them there or at youtube.com/ NPR. If you want to out how to join us live for the, how I built this Resilience series or where you want to find out how to join other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents.org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with help from Farah Safari, JC Howard, Bruce Grant. Elmanian Giana Kappa Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney, Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening.

0 (27m 5s):
Stay safe. And I'll see you back here in a few days. I'm Guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR.