0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Add in the future proof payments platform. Welcome all payments beyond the cutting edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adyen. Visit a D Y E n.com/ NPR to learn more.

1 (15s):
Hey, it's guy here and before we start the show I haven't asked. So this year has been hard and kind of overwhelming from the pandemic to the economic crisis, to the demonstrations against racial injustice, to the election. On top of an economic downturn, that's left millions of people without work. So many of us have experienced loneliness, anxiety, fear, depression, sometimes at all at once. And when it started to become clear that this year would be unlike any year, any of us have ever experienced our team on how I built this, decided to figure out how we could be there for you, because not only did we want to continue to bring you stories that might inspire you or push you to keep going.

1 (1m 5s):
But we also wanted to remind you that you're not alone. This year, we've produced more than 100 total episodes. That's more episodes than all of mad men or all of breaking bad. And we did that this year alone. Each episode of how I built this is painstakingly researched carefully. Fact-checked edited and re edited multiple times scored with original music and mastered to a sound quality that very few other podcasts even bother with. And we do it not just because we love what we do, but because we truly love how, what we make makes your life a little better.

1 (1m 46s):
We make how I built this for you. And if our show brings some meaning and joy and inspiration to your life, please consider making a donation to your local NPR member station. How I built this airs on hundreds of stations across the U S and those stations need your help to continue to provide great content for free. And so if you are able, I hope you can contribute to the work that they do. You can go to donate.npr.org/ Built and give directly to a local NPR station. That's donate.npr.org/ Built.

1 (2m 28s):
And thank you. Hey everyone. And welcome to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR on these episodes. We've been hearing from entrepreneurs and business leaders about how they're building resilience into their businesses during this very challenging year. And today we're gonna hear from Morra errands, mili founder of Women Online and host of the Anxious Achiever podcast. Women Online is a digital agency that works with nonprofits and political campaigns to reach Women audiences. And on her podcast, Morra talks about how anxiety and other mental issues impact the way we work.

3 (3m 6s):
I have two jobs, which is actually great in a pandemic. I guess if you're a Anxious Women Online is a company that I started nine years ago, and we've always been a virtual, we've never had an office. We are a team of, you know, sort of a bad-ass internet pioneers who create digital campaigns that mobilize women for social change. We've worked on three presidential campaigns. And for some of the biggest change-makers in the world, people like Malala, Yousafzai and the UN, and I'm so proud of the work that we do, because it all comes from my early life is a blogger, frankly, when I realized that the sheer act of someone going online and saying something that was their truth from their heart was powerful.

3 (3m 52s):
Right? And so that's what we do. We bring women together. We create content and hopefully it makes some good change. I created the Anxious Achiever because I have clinical anxiety. I have lots of different kinds of anxiety, and it was really hard for me to be an entrepreneur and I needed a roadmap, but there wasn't one. So I decided to try to make one.

1 (4m 13s):
Yeah. So, I mean, it sounds like there was a problem you have that you wanted to address and a problem that a lot of people have. So, so let's talk about this. I mean, here you are, you're an entrepreneur, you've got this collective and you've got this marketing business and you are an Anxious entrepreneur and the Anxious introvert. And Anxious Achiever tell me about that. How does that, how does that factor into your day-to-day life?

3 (4m 39s):
Well, but Guy, you're an introvert. Yes. Are you really? Yeah. Oh my gosh. See, but what do you do every day? You talk about,

1 (4m 46s):
I know, I know. And I, I do live shows in front of like thousands of people and give speeches. I know, but for me it doesn't, it's not that I'm shy. Although sometimes I am or a little bit awkward. It's more that I try to put so much into it because I really want to be there for everybody who has questions and wants to interact. But there's a certain point where I just can't anymore. I'm I can't physically do it.

3 (5m 10s):
That's all it is. I think we overthink introversion. I mean, I've been in the room when you've held the stage of thousands of people. It's like a tent revival. You have got that room, but my guess is after a summit or a big show, you're like, leave me alone.

1 (5m 26s):
I'm like, Oh, I'm asleep at eight.

3 (5m 28s):
Yep. That's all it is happy. Introverts who don't have overwhelming social anxiety. We can talk about that in a minute. Need to manage their energy. I always say Oprah, a huge introvert talks about all the time. It's not about, can I hold the room? Am I funny? Am I shy? It's just about managing your energy and building in less stimuli. More alone time.

1 (5m 49s):
Yeah. By the way, our introverts, and this is something that I think is a bit of a misnomer. They're not always shy, right? No, they're not always

3 (5m 58s):
Quiet. Introverts can be funny. Introverts can be a president. Like it's, there's so many misconceptions. I think about what an introvert is. And I think you and I are both kind of Gabby introverts, right? I think that we're still working through it. There's no blood test, right? So it's not like you can say I'm a type, a introvert. You know, it, if you're someone who walks into a hotel lobby and if the music is loud, the lights are loud. There's people everywhere. It's just a lot of stimuli. And then you have to go to a day-long worth of meetings and you'd be like, no, this is exhausting to me. I like that

1 (6m 32s):
To the lobby and go right to my room and put an ear plugs. You know, this is a question I get from a lot of people all the time. They'll say, you know, I listen to the show and I'm so inspired by the entrepreneurs you have, but I'm not charismatic. I don't have, and I'm a little awkward, or I don't know how to strike up conversations. And I'm like, do you listen to the show? Like half of the people in the show are awkward, social weirdos. You know what I mean? Like the This, there's an idea that you have to be charismatic to be a successful entrepreneur. And, and I don't think that's true at all.

3 (7m 4s):
I think it's a legacy of our sort of model of command and control leadership, right? Where we were taught that a leader was very much a sales person. Who's sort of stood up and held the room, often a white guy in a suit. But the thing about it is you can learn how to hold a room. It's a skill, it's a total skill. It's like learning how to run a meeting. Its like Excel. When you love what you do and you have passion, you can absolutely learn to talk about it in a way that compels people because you are authentic. Yeah.

1 (7m 34s):
When did you realize that you could take your observations about entrepreneurship and your own experience and make it a business and then read a book and start a podcast?

3 (7m 44s):
Well, I still have a day job. Let's be clear, but I like that. It's sort of my creative outlet. I actually coined the term entrepreneurship porn in an article in Harvard business review. I think in 2013, when I wrote about the idea that entrepreneurs had to be tireless, charismatic, always on, on the cover of fast company magazine. And in fact that most entrepreneurs weren't like that and it sort of went viral. Like people really resonated about it. And that's when I started thinking that people really wanted to hear. And, and you know this cause I listened to your podcast, another side of what it's really like to run a business. Yeah.

1 (8m 20s):
Yeah. You know, a lot of the work you do of course is focused on women entrepreneurs as well. But you have this article about this rule. You call it a 10 touches rule, which sounds a little bit weird, but it's not weird. The rule not touch 10 people. It's not a physical right. It's every week you want to reach out to like 10 people in your network, like a phone call or a lunch or coffee, which isn't possible now, but you just want to reach out to them. Are you still following that rule today? Do you still try to hit up 10 people a week?

3 (8m 49s):
Even more so during the pandemic because you, you can't get physically out. So I must admit the 10 touches I stole from my husband who is a wonderful extrovert and has a skill of, I mean, he's still talks to people from first grade. He's that kind of guy, you know, he is an incredible network. I am not that kind of person because I'm an introvert with social anxiety. I may call my best friend on the phone and think that she doesn't want to talk to me every time I reach out to a client, I want to hang up. Cause I'm Anxious. Yeah. So I force myself and I've created methodologies. So 10 touches if you are an introverted or socially anxious person, but you want to keep building that network, keep building that business pipeline every week. Think of, and it doesn't have to be 10. It could be five.

3 (9m 29s):
It could be seven people in your extended network. These are weak ties, right? This is not your best friend. This is someone who you did a project with three years ago. This is someone who you just, they popped up on your feed on Facebook and they've had two kids and they've changed jobs. Send them a note, right? Send an email, create content. The other thing that I will say, and this comes to anxiety, the act of getting out of your head and saying something nice to someone else. It changes your mood. This is actually scientifically proven. So if you find yourself stewing in a bit of anxiety right now about the future and who isn't right and endorsement for someone you respect on LinkedIn, it will change your day.

1 (10m 11s):
True. You've reminded me to do that. It's it's so true because if you think about the people in your life, I can remember virtually every person, especially early in my career who encouraged me, who is like, Hey, that was a good even just passing me in the hallway NPR and said, Hey, I heard a report. That was great. People have said that to me 25 years ago. I remember every single one of those. They meant so much. And especially if you have the ability to endorse or to praise somebody who's younger than you or who you're mentoring, that's so huge. It's so impactful.

3 (10m 45s):
Only will you build your network and it will come back to help you in terms of your business. It will make you happy.

1 (10m 52s):
It's so important. So tell me how w I mean, let's talk about this idea for a moment. I mean, we're at a time where we're getting lunches or coffees and, and let's face it even after the vaccine. I think a lot of us are going to be reluctant to do that, you know, right away. But let's say you want to reach out to 10 people and they are weak ties. People you maybe met once or twice, or haven't talked to in a long time. What would you say in that email?

3 (11m 14s):
I think that the first thing to get over is a sense of shame or embarrassment that you're reaching out. So many people feel that they shouldn't have to ask for help. Right. Especially, you know, if you're trying to make it on your own and you think, Oh gosh, why, why am I doing this? I shouldn't be asking for help. You have to get rid of that. Because if you're going to be an entrepreneur, especially you have to get used to asking people for help. And especially now in the pandemic, we all need a little help. Right? No, one's going to do it alone. So having your mind that this is a good thing to do, but also give to receive. I think that the thing that people who get overly overwhelmed by the, of I have to be in networking do is that they reach out right away with too big and ask, you know, they're asking someone to marry them when they haven't even been on a first date.

3 (12m 1s):
Yup. Tired metaphor, but we all get it. Yeah. I like the idea of very much of giving someone something useful, whether its an article, whether it's a quick check-in and then seeing if there's a chance to connect more deeply and sometimes you have to wait, you know, it takes a long time for relationships to build. I've lost many clients and I've said to my team, they will be back. Let's be good to them. Let's not write that crummy email that we all want to write. Cause they will be back.

1 (12m 30s):
Yeah, no, totally. I'm wonder more. I mean, given that so much of your work is about connecting right this year has really kind of forced you to probably rethink that entirely. I know you, you recently gave a talk. I think about how to kind of deal with this virtual work environment that many of us have found ourselves. And one of the things you talk about is don't try to recreate the culture that you've got in the office place online because it's not possible. And that actually is going to be counterproductive. What did you mean by that?

3 (13m 2s):
I think that a lot of people, especially at the beginning of the pandemic, when we thought it may not have been nine, 10 months just slap the old routine on a zoom. So if you had six meetings a day in the office, all of a sudden you had six on camera meetings. And I think that a lot of people don't realize is that, and you'll understand this. A zoom meeting is really a performance, especially if you're talking, if you're not talking in your own zoom, you're actually more likely to become disengaged and depressed. So zoom is often draining for everyone. Even introverts. There was a lot of articles about all the introverts are so happy. They sit in their PJ's all day and no, we feel disconnected too because we're all just out there performing on zoom, wondering what the social cues are sort of fake connecting and not getting any real energy back.

3 (13m 50s):
So my first piece of advice is to do less zoom. That's not, it's not rocket science. You know, do sort of like a ratio. I have like a one to three ratio for every one. Zoom. I try to do three audio calls because I think it recharges people. They don't have to be on camera. The more focused, you know, don't just put the old rules onto the new schedule, build in breaks, respect, boundaries, et cetera.

1 (14m 16s):
When we come back in just a moment, more of my conversation with Morra Aarons mealy and how leadership styles have changed in a year, filled with collective anxiety, stay with us. I'm Guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsors square with their new podcast talking squarely for many businesses, financial stability is always difficult, but in 2020 many have been forced to make difficult decisions in order to keep the lights on, learn how three distinctly different businesses have financially impacted by the pandemic and how they're managing to stay afloat and adapt. During this challenging time.

1 (14m 57s):
In episode three, financial survival, listen to the episode and subscribe to talking squarely. Wherever you listen to podcasts, this message comes from NPR sponsor. Add in the future proof payments platform. Adyen connects you with customers around the world and makes it simple to accept all kinds of payments in app online in store touch-free and beyond with a single solution, keep customers happy. And you're a business growing with Adyen business, not boundaries. Visit a D Y E n.com/ NPR to learn more. And just a reminder this month is NPR annual end of year fundraising campaign. So please go to donate.npr.org/ Built to support your local station.

1 (15m 41s):
And thanks. Hey, welcome back to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR and I'm talking with Morra Aarons mealy, she's the founder of women Online and host of the Anxious Achiever podcast with the economic and social instability. This year. Many people who are experiencing more anxiety every day at work and at home in Morra says that leaders need to find balance and showing both strength and vulnerability.

3 (16m 11s):
I think the first thing is to acknowledge that you feel anxiety and that your team probably does too. And depending on the kind of team you have, you can say, wow, I'm feeling Anxious this is really hard, but you as a leader also needs to remember that you need to create kind of a holding environment, right? So I think one of the things that leaders struggle with, but I think is okay to be a little bit vulnerable with is to say, Oh my gosh, this is really hard. I don't know. I said this to my own team at the beginning of the pandemic, when we lost 30% of our business overnight, they were all emailing me saying, am I going to have a job? And I said, I don't know what six months from now will look like, but your job is protected right now. And you have my commitment that I will try the best I can.

3 (16m 52s):
They knew I was Anxious. But I also felt like it was my job as the leader of the team to not be a mess. And I think that every leader has to find that balance of being vulnerable and open and not denying reality, but not being a full on mess in front of the team. And you know, the other thing, this sounds silly, but we joke about doom scrolling on Twitter. Yeah. Don't do it right before a big meeting. Yeah. Don't let that fear into your Workday protect yourself because it is scary out there.

1 (17m 26s):
Yeah. I go through periods where I just don't check social media, like, you know, two or three weeks. And you mentioned, you know, you mentioned anxiety and leaders and showing up and dealing with it. I had a conversation with a pretty prominent CEO about a week and a half ago. He's he's a bit older, over 60. And we were talking about this idea of vulnerability. You know, one of the things that we try to do in how I built this is dry out of vulnerability because I think its really important. I think that authentic leaders show vulnerability, right? And I have found that it's easier for younger leaders to understand and adopt that, but harder for older leaders to do that, people will often ask me, well, why is it so important for leaders to show vulnerability?

1 (18m 14s):
You know, why, why do you want to draw that out? What's so important about some founder being vulnerable on your show. Why does that make them a better leader? And sometimes I have a hard time answering that question. I think I know what the answer is, but I have a hard time answering that question. What's your answer to that question? Why

3 (18m 34s):
I have two answers. One is internal when you know yourself and you know that you can be vulnerable, you have self-awareness and we have 40 years of data showing that emotionally intelligent people are better leaders. They just are. When you know what's going to set you off, when you know what makes you anxious. When you know that something is going to trigger your anxiety in a negotiation and maybe lead to a worse outcome, you're going to get a better outcome because you're not going to get triggered as much to me. It's just simple. When you understand yourself, you're better. Right? And people respond to people who understand themselves who have empathy and who aren't fake.

3 (19m 19s):
I mean, I think at the end of the day, people throughout this pandemic have been scared to pretend like things aren't a mess, but the truth is we all know it's a mess. You can't pretend otherwise. And so I don't want to be led by someone who pretends like things are perfect. I have no trust in that person know. And so a little bit of a vulnerability goes a long way. Now you need competence. Amy Cuddy has done this research competence and vulnerability is the ideal mix of what people want to see in their leaders.

1 (19m 54s):
Yeah, no, I'd love that. And thank you for that. That's a great answer. I want to get to some questions. We have a bunch of questions and there are also good. So I want you to get to as many as possible. This is from Graziella via LinkedIn and Graziella asks, how do passionate entrepreneurs who are introverts? How do they become successful? When so much of like the customer adoption and venture funding is about engagement and pitching and things like that.

3 (20m 19s):
Again, it's a skill. So I think that really narrowing down and practicing is really important. People make fun of having an elevator pitch, but I think all of us can agree that that's one of the hardest things in life to do, but you've got to put that work in up front and then once you know it it's muscle memory and you got it right. Got it. And then as soon as you can hire people around you, right? Hire someone who just loves to go out and schmooze, but don't ever think that the fact that you get nervous before you go talk to people and you want to throw up and you want to hide in the bathroom means that you can be a successful entrepreneur because every successful entrepreneur feels that way.

1 (20m 59s):
Do you know what Graziella do you know what I'm going to tell you something. I get nervous all the time. I've been, I've been on the radio for 25 years. I still get nervous. My heart still starts to flutter when the red light goes on, the mic light goes on. I still happens. I'm not exaggerating. Even before I do These I still get nervous. Sometimes I get nervous before I give speeches. Before I have a live shows before the high Built, the summit, I always get nervous. And what happens, what I find is my heart races. And my pulse is, you know, speeds up and it lasts for about 10 or 15 seconds. And then it, and then it's gone. It feels like an eternity on stage.

1 (21m 39s):
It feels like it's lasting forever and it feels like everybody can see it, but nobody can see it only. You can see it and feel it. And once I really kind of realize and internalize that I understood that it was just part of a deal that I was going to get nervous and I just had to get through it and then it was going to pass.

3 (21m 56s):
And I bet when you first started out Guy you might of been nervous for two weeks before.

1 (21m 60s):
Oh my God. I was taking like breathing classes. And the first time I hosted talk of the nation, which was an old NPR live show back, this is back in 2008, a national live show. I was so nervous for six weeks. I was doing yoga everyday and breathing exercises. I couldn't sleep for six weeks. So I remember that,

3 (22m 18s):
But you work through it and you persist. And I think that that's, that's the lesson and that builds, builds resilience.

1 (22m 26s):
Yeah, totally. All right. More questions. This is from Joseph McCarthy. What are your best coping mechanisms and systems that help you manage the overwhelming aspects of entrepreneurship

3 (22m 38s):
Team? I learned, even though I'm an introvert and I love to be alone and I work alone and I have since 2006, that if I feel alone, I fail and I go hide under my covers and ignore and avoid. And that is death. Every successful entrepreneur knows if you avoid problems, they explode. So I had to learn that I needed someone early on and it was going to cost me money that I probably needed in other places to help me not feel alone and to take on the things that were scary. For example, when we, when we had that, Oh my gosh, we've lost 30% of our business overnight in March this year, it was my partner who showed me an Excel spreadsheet and said, you know what, let's adjust the forecast.

3 (23m 29s):
We can do this. I was a wreck. I was having panic attacks and she showed me an Excel spreadsheet and it was okay. So think about what makes you feel more in control and more held. It could be other people, it could be advisors could be hiring.

1 (23m 46s):
Totally agree. I its and this is why we often talk about find your co-founder, you know, cause many of the people who come on the show actually did have a co-founder, but we're only interviewing them, but having a co-founder or people around you, a team around you are people that you can rely on or a partner. Somebody who can just, you know, has a different perspective, get on the balcony. Right? Ron Heifetz at Harvard Kennedy school used to talk about getting on the balcony and looking down at yourself and taking stock of the situation. This is a question from Anthony Simon via LinkedIn. Anthony writes, I have struggled with anxiety and introversion throughout my career, especially at networking events. I know that that feeling, Anthony, are there any tools or suggestions for managing these feelings or like, let's say you're in a, in a networking event and you're just, you know, you're standing there alone and I've been to conferences, Ted conferences and other conferences where I'm like, I don't know anybody.

1 (24m 42s):
And this is, you know, before I did how I built this and nobody knew who I was and I was just there standing around. How do you approach people? How do you start conversations with people at these events?

3 (24m 53s):
You walk up to them and you say hi, can you smile? And honestly what brings you here? My, my friend, Allison Shapira has a great speech coach. Her advice is all you have to say is what brings you here and let the other person do the work. Don't overthink it. You do not need to give a Nobel prize speech in your very first hello at a networking event. And the other thing I would say is if it's causing you that much pain leave, I mean the fact that I think a lot of us also think when we're entrepreneurs, that if we leave the event, we're missing out on our big VC funding or a big seed round, you're not, if it's causing you that much internal pain, go home, write some killer blog, get it placed, do something on LinkedIn, find your channel that works for you.

1 (25m 47s):
All right. This is a very, very specific question. I think a really important question. It's from Christine Marie Mallari, Christine Marie asks for Women hopping on their first zoom call with, you know, that important person, like let's say an investor or some, you know, somebody they're pitching, should I wear makeup or not? And Christine Marie says, she read from a study that too much makeup actually makes you look inauthentic.

3 (26m 12s):
I think it's about your brand as an entrepreneur. If you're a pitching, you need to have a good idea of what your persona is. I think that that's really important. And if you're a socially Anxious entrepreneur, umm, can really help you. I have known many women entrepreneurs and part of their brand was red lipstick. And they were like, this is who I am. I wear red lipstick. Some women don't wear any makeup. But what I like to think about is, is the holistic brand that I want to present. And that should be who the investor meets. If you have never worn makeup in your life, don't where a false eyelashes are in your first investor meeting.

3 (26m 56s):
So really it's about what kind of CEO do I want to present to the world?

1 (26m 60s):
And Chris Murray, we did an episode with Melissa Butler of the lip bar just a couple of weeks ago, such a cool story. It's a cosmetics brand. And she talks about this, about how kind of paraphrasing what you said, but it's not about wearing makeup for the sake of wearing makeup. It's about feeling powerful in, in whatever way that makes you feel powerful. If it's wearing some lipstick or nothing at all, it's, it's how it makes you feel. And I thought that was a really important perspective. So you might want to check out that episode of how I built this with Melissa Butler. Thank you for that question. We have time for one or two more. Lets get a question from Claire Morra Shima. Hello Claire. Claire asks, where do you draw the line between vulnerability and oversharing for somebody who is experiencing anxiety?

3 (27m 45s):
I have a little saying that a therapist, friend of mine told me no on-camera meltdowns. Leave the mess at home for your therapist, right? You could say to your team, I really want to run through these numbers because the economy is very uncertain and I want to make sure that we have a good handle on the next six months. They don't need to know that money makes you anxious because of your parents' divorce, which frankly money makes me anxious because of my parents divorced, but that's my brand. So I think it's really about again, thinking through being strong and vulnerable and how much, how much am I comfortable with.

3 (28m 25s):
But I think that oversharing in the social media age is a temptation that a lot of entrepreneurs might feel actually because a lot of our favorite entrepreneurs do seem to be able to share a lot right? When they get on Guy show, but they've already made they're a billion dollars, you know? And I think that it's really important not to show the mess. It's a practice vulnerability with not the mess.

1 (28m 49s):
This is a question from Raven by a U2. Raven asks, how do you manage energy levels? Raven is an introvert with bipolar tendencies. There are times when, when Raven's energy is absolutely through the roof and then times where, you know, they just tank through the floor. How do you manage energy, your energy?

3 (29m 8s):
Well, I have the same. I get a little manic. So when you're a little manic and you're on zoom, for example, having a prop, my friend ancho cat actually showed me this one. When, when I get too fidgety, have a problem in your hand that you can sort of fidget with or have a fidget when you're feeling like your energy is very low. I think its really important to shut down the screens and get some fresh air and do some belly breathing, put your feet on the floor and breathe, not in your chest, which is where we hold anxiety, breathe in your belly. Yeah. Really try to center it and redirect the energy. And if a lone time is what you need take a long time.

1 (29m 48s):
Yup. And I would add to that, Raven, you've purchased a million times. I'm so sorry that I'm repeating This for the millions and ones at the time exercise. I hate exercise Morra but I do it every day. I've done it every day for, you know, forever and ever. I, I get out of bed and like, Ugh, today I'm just not going to do it. And I do it. And it's great because that actually has a huge impact on my unregulated, my energy over the course of the day.

3 (30m 15s):
Well Guy and real talk. I have depression as well. And so I have some days when it's hard for me to get out of bed when I feel is really my mood is so low and I know, and I'll say just 10 minutes, Morra just 10 minutes. It's like that mood flip. It's like endorsing someone on LinkedIn. When you are an anxious depressive entrepreneur, you get very good at having little hacks. Yes. And a little bit of a heart rate raising is really one of them

1 (30m 41s):
Before I let you go Morra this year. I mean your business is a big part of your business is as you mentioned, conferences and being part of conferences and helping organize them, how are you building in resilience within yourself and your, your business and what you do to make sure that you can get through 20, 21 stronger and you know, wiser and better at what you do.

3 (31m 7s):
So Guy, I'm proud to tell you that I gave out bonuses to my team yesterday that we had an amazing year because although I was an anxious wreck, when we lost the live event business, my team who are empowered said, we're going to figure this out. What kind of content do we want right now we did over 25 live events that reached over 500,000 people. And we created real entertainment for people that met the moment. And so my lesson going into 2021 is to get out of their way and really remember that we're all in this together and that our clients were right there with us.

3 (31m 52s):
I had to manage my anxiety and let them do what they did. And that helped me build so much resilience because I learned like, just cause I feel this way doesn't mean its true. My team is great.

1 (32m 3s):
That's an excerpt from my live conversation with Morra Aarons mili founder of women Online and host of the Anxious Achiever podcast to see our full live interview. You can go to facebook.com/how I built this. And if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com/ NPR. If you want to find out more about the, how I built this Resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents.org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with help from Ferris Safari, JC Howard, Bruce Grant Elmanian Giana Kappa Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neeva grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening.

1 (32m 44s):
Stay safe. And I'll see you in the new year I'm Guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this Resilience edition from NPR.

0 (32m 51s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adyen, the future-proof payments platform. Adyen connects you with customers around the world and makes it simple to accept all kinds of payments in app online in store touch-free and beyond with a single solution. Keep customers happy in your business. Growing with Adyen, business, not boundaries, visit a D Y E n.com/ NPR to learn more.