2 (0s):
Hey, welcome to how I built this resilience Edition. I'm guy Roz each week. I'm doing live video conversations with Founders and entrepreneurs about how they're building resilience into their businesses right now, and you can join those live conversations at noon Eastern Wednesdays and Fridays at our Facebook page. By the way, if you're looking for our regular episodes, we're still dropping new ones every Monday. So check those out today. I'm bringing you to conversations later on. We'll hear from Marcia Kilgore the founder of too many businesses to name. It flopped PewDiePie and Bliss. But first we're going to hear from Tony shoe the founder of door - we originally featured Tony and door - on the podcast back in November 2018.

2 (41s):
So check out that episode. If you want to hear his backstory today door - makes up about 35% of the food delivery Market in the US and since the crisis door - has seen a spike in their business as more and more struggling restaurants are trying online delivery to stay afloat. Tony. Join me from his home. The Bay Area and right now he says door - is seeing a spike in new drivers signing up. Alright, so let's start talking about the business here, right? We had a whole week where we talk to chefs and restaurant tours about that industry and that industry was kind of like the canary in the coal mine because they were the first to be hit really really hard along with the airline industry.

2 (1m 23s):
What what is that meant for door - because on the one hand I'm assuming I'm assuming there's been a surge in demand. But also a drop in options and in restaurants that are able to operate so tell me give me a sense of what's going on. Yeah, I think like you said it certainly started as a Public Health crisis globally and when it came to the United States, we are still in the middle of that Health crisis and very quickly it emerged into a simultaneous economic crisis. And I think like you said a lot of Industries have been hit very very hard travel is one Services I think is another and and local Tell is a third and and restaurant owners, you know, I think back to when I was a kid as a dishwasher my Mom's restaurant in the three decades.

2 (2m 9s):
I've been observing the restaurant industry. I don't think I've ever seen something like this where business effectively just halt it to a stop. I do think though some restaurants are actually doing okay. I know there's lots of heartbreaking stories where restaurants having to close lots of furloughs and those stories are true in the meanwhile because governments have allowed restaurants to keep their kitchens open. These have gone up, you know, especially after consumers got used to the idea that the shelter in place and some of these other announcements that they would be in place for a while that they got used to their old ways of life. They still seek that convenience. They still want to support their local business. They recognize maybe they can't always do that walking inside stores.

2 (2m 49s):
However, they can get delivery. And so yes that that is definitely going up and some businesses. They're actually doing pretty well in this, you know time of year for them. Just making sure that they can even have enough money. To pay things like rent is a pretty big deal. I would say the vast majority of businesses can actually do that. They're even restaurants who have been doing a lot of off-premise and take out prior to this pandemic or actually seeing success, you know, they're actually doing okay. So it is a very very difficult time but delivery and take out I think have now become essential services that have kept a lot of these businesses alive. Are you finding restaurants that are pivoting right now that are actually saying, you know what we just gotta focus on just getting food.

2 (3m 30s):
food out the door and not worry about presentation so much restaurants that were doing that are doing weld in surviving this pandemic or ones that recognize that even prior to this pandemic it wasn't that, you know, every meal occasion what was happening inside their walls, so they were starting to invest or they had already invested in, you know, their take out or their off-premise business and those businesses are actually doing pretty well and and and they're able to pay off their rents, you know some Are starting to think about reopening their stores, especially given, you know, some of the progress we've made on the health front. The second point I would make is there are businesses that are starting to change how they do business.

2 (4m 14s):
I see Michelin star restaurants changing their menus, which used to be exclusively for in-store very high-end kinds of experiences and they're making now more approachable accessible family meals that can really service. Both comfort and as a way for them to keep their business up and running during this period of time Tony you are I mean most businesses in America are losing right now because of the economic situation, there are some businesses that are actually doing very well. We had Stewart Butterfield from slack on last week and that is a business that is a quote unquote winners Zoom is another example door - is another example, it's sort of weird, right because you're seeing this economic crisis play out in real time, but your business is this Doing well.

2 (5m 1s):
So I've just want to get a sense from you on on sort of how you kind of internalized that and also what you think your responsibility is as a quote-unquote winner in this very unusual situation to me. I think it means different things, you know, we started this company to empower local economies. And I think of that I think of all the audience's that we serve, you know for for these restaurants as you mentioned and for other types of merchants now that we serve so so even in addition to restaurants, it's making sure that we can keep their businesses afloat. That's actually why we invest tens of millions of dollars in marketing for them so that they can get as close as they can to the sales that they once were seeing before this pandemic in the forms of marketing for drivers.

2 (5m 42s):
It's making sure that they're safe defaulting to no contact deliveries making sure that you know, there's a holistic program to protect them. So it starts with prevention so masks hand sanitizers and gloves making sure that they can get Access to Diagnostics. So in the form of telemedicine at affordable rates, making sure that heaven forbid if any of them were impacted by covid-19 that they would have financial assistance and then you know, finally for consumers making sure that we can speed up some of the things that maybe we had planned for later years now because bring things like Essentials like grocery items or convenience items these cesare no longer, you know convenient Services.

2 (6m 32s):
Sometimes they really are essential services to some of the most vulnerable populations like the elderly, you know, the final one that we've elevated and accelerated is really the community giving free deliveries to all healthcare workers Nationwide, you know, so the largest Hospital Systems hundreds of thousands of healthcare workers daily, and then finally, you know, bring meals to school children who sadly can't get access to those lunches anymore because schools are closed and so to me the Possibility has always been there. It's just pronounced right now and you know from a company perspective we take that extremely seriously and we're pulling forward a lot of the initiatives that we have planned for later use Tony.

2 (7m 11s):
What do you say to people who are skipping tips right now? I mean, I don't want to shame anybody and it's tough time and people are tight. You know right now times are tough for so many people but what do you think about somebody who doesn't tip? Well, I recommend people to give when they can and you know, what I would say is tip certainly help. Help at the same time. I'm seeing a lot of you know other ways of giving as well in addition, you know to touch for example them. Thank you notes that are being drawn out in chalk on the garage driveway or posters and the window and a know it's different from tips. But I think these small moments of positivity. They go a long way. I see this also in the restaurant Community where restaurant owners are not just trying to bring positivity in the form of say donating meals to those who really need them.

2 (7m 60s):
They're doing that also with the Dashers but it and when you can and then I recognize it's a very hard time for everybody and we're all in this together. If you can give a little I'd recommend that you do given that you operate across states. Are you seeing huge differences in business depending on the state? Like for example, you know in New York with a crisis has been you know, quite a cute. Did you see just sort of delivering numbers surge into your compared with California? For example where the numbers of covid-19 cases is? Are lower so Most states took a similar shape there were certainly a couple of exceptions but most States took some more shape and a lot of it has to do with you know, what announcements were made by state governments or city officials.

2 (8m 43s):
And when those announcements were made. So for instance right after the shelter-in-place announcements were made and in a city, the first thing that would happen is, you know, consumers would actually go and stockpile and groceries and I think this is where you may have read about some of the stories of stores running out of toilet. Paper convenience items and things like this after about a couple of weeks. That's when you started seeing consumer Behavior resume to some of what was happening before the pandemic which was seeking convenience. I'm not necessarily cooking every meal and they would actually start ordering from restaurants again and Most states and cities took that shape New York was a bit of an exception to that in a sense that New York has a lot of people who commute into the city typically when all the businesses are open to work during the day.

2 (9m 30s):
And then they may leave after hours as the work they closes because of the shelter-in-place announcements New York just saw a reduction in the number of people that were there and so the delivery volume there was more significantly impacted Tony before let you go. Let's talk about like five years out from now right when you look back at this time period what do you want to do now that you can say in five years time like we did this, right? We did this in a way that conforms and aligns with our values like what is the thing that you really You are kind of reminding yourself to focus on right now to me. This moment has really been one that has energized team door - you know and and I recognized her amongst a lucky few who get to see our mission especially now realized almost every single hour of the day in a very very pronounced way and you know for us it's making sure that we do the right thing to continue being a true.

2 (10m 30s):
Partner two cities making sure that regardless of how the world is going to evolve and change and adapt to any form of New Normal. We are the best way for local businesses to be online to learn how to do business in a world where customers me may not always walk inside their doors to be there for the workers on the platform and make sure that not only do they have the flexibility but that they also have the protections that they need and deserve to be on the road to make sure That we can continue serving all of the consumers and bring food and other Essentials and finally making sure that we are partnered to the community because we started door - as a business that can solve real problems that can take technology to bring food from those who are very generous and donating them to those who need them to bring supplies to make sure the health care workers are protected.

2 (11m 24s):
So all of these things are things that I look at as not only things that I'm The team has done now but also things that we will continue to do in the Future Tony shoe door - thank you so much for joining us great to see you here. And hopefully we can see each other in face to face one of these days. I hope so talk soon guy. That's an excerpt for my conversation with Tony shoe the founder of door - to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com how I built this or to NPR's YouTube page when we come back in just a moment. We're going to hear from Marcia Kilgore about why good ideas and inspiration come from Isis and struggle stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

2 (12m 10s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from HubSpot HubSpot creates powerful and easy-to-use Marketing sales and service software. It's designed to empower teams. So they can focus on what matters generating leads accelerating sales and creating better customer experiences and with access to helpful educational content support and hundreds of app Integrations. You'll have everything you need to run your business all in one place. Learn more at spot.com hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience addition. So we first featured Marcia Kilgore story on the podcast back in 2018.

2 (12m 53s):
So if you want to hear her backstory look for it on our podcast Q. It's an incredible story. Anyway, she's founded five Brands including soap & Glory fit flop Bliss and beauty pie fit Flopper Footwear brand is mainly sold in retail shops, but her other business beauty pie is a direct-to-consumer Cosmetics company a spoke with Marcia about For her big Ideas actually emerged during times of Crisis and struggle. Let's go with 5th flop. I mean our sales for fifth flop right

1 (13m 24s):
now. You know, what footwear of course is going to be tough because we normally will wholesale our product to a lot of different retailers throughout the US UK and actually 65 different countries as soon as covert head. Of course in retail is shut down most retailers, if not all of them as well as a lot of our Distributors just canceled their forward orders and we were having a banner year guy we should We're just sort of the worst time to be having a really great year. Our product looks beautiful. They have a new design team. We have this incredible momentum because the retailers were also really excited about the product now, unfortunately, they'll cancel their orders. So not only do we have our normal product that would have gone to them but probably 30 or 40 percent more so that's been a real challenge for us because we have to figure out okay.

1 (14m 6s):
What are we gonna do? What are we gonna do with all of these issues? It's very interesting though. Of course people are finding their way to the internet, which is amazing and Had probably a doubling of our online sales because those who couldn't go into retailers or just coming to our site, you know to buy the shoes that they want and would have and I find that people love the brand so much that they're still buying shoes despite the fact that not many people are spending that much time walking around outside. So I guess that goes to the strength of the brand and the strength of the quality of product and we're really excited about that

2 (14m 39s):
your other brand beauty pie Cosmetics brand that you launched three and half years ago. You were I think you were about to open up a pop-up shop in London, like in mid-march, right? Like it Harvey Nichols.

1 (14m 51s):
Yes. So Harvey Nichols, which is a luxury department store in London asked us to do pop-up shop. We went in for three days and then we started to kind of get too much noise in terms of the news about how close covid was getting to London and we decided that we would just shut it down and start again another time, but it was great while it lasted and

2 (15m 11s):
beauty pie was already direct-to-consumer. I mean that was not in Tell stores anyway, so presumably that brand is a bit more resilient because that was your business model.

1 (15m 21s):
In fact, we're seeing about four times the number of new members joining every day now because you know, you're getting these incredible luxury quality products, but for so much less money that people I think in a crisis time are more responsible with their disposable income if they have disposable income still and I think people are looking for ways to economize but without letting go of the quality that they Want so we are kind of on fire actually a beauty pie what explains how

2 (15m 50s):
people are buying cosmetics and skincare right. Now what what

1 (15m 54s):
explains that you have to look good on Zoom? I just know we're all on these meetings all day every day and I think you got to have your glowing skin. And also, I think now more than ever it's so important to take care of yourself just to remind yourself that you're still human. You still need a small treat if you can get something, that's great, and it's Affordable that's fantastic. But just something to kind of ease the burden and everyone needs something to look forward to especially when the days kind of roll into, you know one into another. I think we all just need to treat ourselves a little bit. Some people are drinking a lot of wine. Some people are using a lot of beauty products one will make you look better in the end.

2 (16m 32s):
I want to go to a question from audience is from Kathy sonnet. She asked as a creative leader. It's been challenging to create the same magic with teams or clients in this new landscape. What are your thoughts of your Coach to kind of achieving that creative magic when remote collaboration is the new Norm. It's really

1 (16m 50s):
hard, isn't it? I think storytelling is a big part of it. I think we are getting used to of course. You don't have the same kind of momentum that you will have in a group setting but storytelling and just building up I guess anticipation before you presenting something for instance to a client or to a group will probably help you a little bit more it is all about figuring out how to communicate and to build that Kind of magic with the energy in the pace, but doing it remove tiles on your screen. So, you know, it's going to be practice. We're going to be perfect at it, but it'll take a while before you perfect your Technique and I think probably also just being very in tune to your audience.

1 (17m 30s):
If you are presenting something I've done this a couple of times actually cuz I've presented decks to people over Zoom afterwards. I will actually stop and I will write down what didn't go well, what could I have done better? What could someone have done better and then gone? Back and just reject the deck so that I remember all this needs to go here because that storytelling that you might normally feel or be able to see from body language. Maybe it's not taking place in the same way and you just iterate but I think we have to be you know easy on ourselves not to easy but it's a new learning curve how to do this and it's a new skill and I'll be better in the end for

2 (18m 7s):
it. I remember in the episode the first time you're on the show. You described how you were like 19 years old or 20 years old you were in, New York. Basically took a three or four week skincare course to learn about skin care and that said a whole chain of motion for what would become Bliss and your journey as an entrepreneur. We're in the middle of great pause in a sense right that it's challenging and difficult. But I wonder whether that experience in the sense, you know, you had that time to learn how to do something which eventually led to what you would do with your life how this this is a moment maybe for opportunity as well

1 (18m 41s):
so much opportunity is this is sort of my whole theory about I ship and also but new ideas and they usually will come from difficulties. I don't think that anybody who is sitting around feeling very comfortable is necessarily going to come up with the next big idea. Usually Big Ideas come from struggles from things that are difficult from fears that you've got things that are lacking in your own life and in all of my businesses. I came up with an idea based on something that I couldn't find myself or a bad experience that I've had and then Feel created something better out of it and really has, you know worked out time and time again for me.

1 (19m 21s):
It's usually a disappointment that brings me to create something better and that just means that for everybody watching there so many opportunities if you look at them that way we always say there are two kinds of thoughts. There's a helpful thought and there's an unhelpful thought that's it. So when you're at home Ivan, thank you know what? Okay, I'm feeling this. I'm Feeling scared. I'm feeling like I don't have this kind of skill will let me go and get that scale rather than I'll never have that scale. I'm always try for having an unhelpful thoughts identify it. It's human and then think okay. Do I need to have this thought and instead try and turn that in to help a thought what kind of plan you can put in motion to get where you need to

2 (20m 6s):
go. Yeah. I remember when we had Howard Schultz on a few years ago. He talked about how when you're comfortable. That's when you're in trouble that big Ideas come from Struggle and they come from being uncomfortable and being sort of off

1 (20m 18s):
balance. Yeah. Absolutely. It's how you grow your how you grow how you build your muscle everything that you don't know how to do is just a muscle that you haven't exercised. So this is the opportunity to kind of get in there battle fight. It's your exercise at your weight lifting and you want to come out with those muscles being stronger on the other side. So it's an opportunity for everyone. I know it's still early. We're

2 (20m 40s):
still like what eight weeks into this thing for most of Europe in the US. No longer for other countries, but are you sort of seeing the beginnings of new opportunities for you for what you do right. Now, are you starting this kind of see the seeds of those future

1 (20m 54s):
opportunities, you know, my plate is so full at the moment. It's difficult. Sometimes when I've got so much going on and just so much to run every day in terms of output. It's hard to come up with new things. Although the shower is a good place, you know often in the shower, you will come up with a new idea and I have a few other ideas kind of in the pipeline that I put on hold because they're Don't have time to even think about them, but I'm sure that you know, there's so many people out there with ideas that they perhaps didn't didn't have the time to look into or didn't have the need and those are things that are going to sprout some mess. I'd encourage everybody to just try and create a plan for whatever their idea is whatever that goal is right and it's going to be about being flexible emotionally and flexible in how you approach things.

1 (21m 44s):
It's that yo Yoga, you need the muscle building. You need the yoga. You've got to be a river that can kind of move and change your direction, but you have to set your sight on a goal. And I think this is the time that people can really get that because you don't have as much to

2 (21m 58s):
lose right is a question from Jennifer Jordyn hammacher. What are you learning? Like, how are you learning to manage inventory and new product rollout creatively right. Now, what are some things that you're doing to figure out the best way to handle those

1 (22m 12s):
things? Well, sir, PewDiePie A product plan for a very long time and it takes about 18 months to make a new beauty product and you know oddly the supply chain hasn't really been challenged that much. So we're very lucky there with Footwear. Of course, we have to think about how many of the products that we ordered for this year. We'll ever even see the light of day and whether or not we should be putting them all live for instance or we should hold some of those products that are going to be just as Classic this year as they might be next year when no one has seen them and do we just hold them in? The warehouse try and work on some payment plans for instance with some of the factories and have them ready for next year and think you know, everything old is new again as they say but sometimes if you've got a classic product no one will know that it isn't new except for you and it is new the first time that anybody sees it.

1 (23m 2s):
So I guess it's being open-minded about what our definitions are and and trying to move some of those things to suit the financial situations. We find ourselves in

2 (23m 12s):
Marcia when you we last saw each other in San Francisco. You came to the how I built this Summit when I interviewed you on stage. Then you quote of the book Originals. I think by Adam grant that book says true entrepreneurs hedge their bets what does bet hedging look like in this environment, right? Because I mean, I think you were referring to the fact that at one point in your career, you had two businesses going at the same time and that was kind of an example of that. I mean should entrepreneurs be hedging their bets approaching big decisions more

1 (23m 40s):
cautiously, I think certainly in the time, you know like this and this is Extraordinary right we never as a world Community. We've never faced anything like this. So I think the most people will be so focused on just keeping the day-to-day running. It's probably hard to do too much hedging but hedging in terms of having skills, right or honing skills or learning how to do more than one thing just in case you can't afford a person in your business to do job X anymore. You might be able to pick it up yourself. I think is you know, it's always a good thing. I've until recently I've Had a business that I couldn't do most of the jobs. So when I had my very first facial Studio, I was doing the laundry and the facials and the reception and the booking and everything else and then you know, eventually I could give some of those things away.

1 (24m 27s):
So for smaller businesses are hedging your bets probably just means we're learning more parts of that business that you might have thought you could afford to Outsource. Maybe you can't right now and that's all right, they'll be a time for it and probably that will mean that when when that time does come that you can you can hire someone you will know that person's job. So well that you'll be able to find the perfect person to fill that role and that's gift because you always feel really confident that you've chosen someone who really knows what they're talking about because you've

2 (24m 57s):
done it question from Gloria Duarte. She asks brainstorming is so important and so Gloria asks any suggestions or advice for how you be confined platforms to brainstorm ideas or to find support right

1 (25m 10s):
now. Oh my God, I think that's so easy right now, isn't it? Because you bought zoom and That all of these platforms where you can just share invite everybody to a brainstorm invite 20 people to brainstorm and say I've got three problems can anyone help get a glass of wine and let's go and set a time and send out invitations. I bet you'll get some people it could be quite fun actually Temp brainstorms and invite some people and asked them to invite people and when you start doing those connected thought projects you come up with so many fresh ideas and also people who are willing to

2 (25m 42s):
help or see every time I've been to, New York. Since I interviewed you I think about you living in New York in the 80s like came as an eighteen-year-old. Like you knew nobody your sister was there he came from Canada, you know money if you were that same young woman now and you were starting out and you were looking to build something. What do you think you would have done or tried to do to

1 (26m 4s):
figure it out? You know, it's so different now because everybody is online and I'd say it'll be easier so much easier when lockdown ends and you can connect with people but I think that what's going to make People special now and makes you different is your ability to connect really closely with other human beings and it's not going to be so much about rushing around. But what makes you special as a person will also be your greatest Advantage so that uniqueness and and your network and your ability to be authentic with people I think will give you, you know, real step up when you can connect with people and of course now that can be done via Zoom or via.

1 (26m 44s):
Via FaceTime or any of the other different platforms that we've got but I do think that being your authentic self working hard and focusing on what really matters to you in terms of your career. And what you want to do is the way that it's going to go do

2 (27m 1s):
you think that this economic crisis is going to change the way people consume cosmetics and beauty products. I mean you are direct-to-consumer fit flop is a retail based product. But with with respect to beauty pie mean Do you see a future where more and more cosmetic brands are going to focus on direct to Consumer rather than going into department stores and Sephora and that kind of distribution model. I

1 (27m 25s):
think they were probably a lot of friends that are already direct-to-consumer, but they will have a direct consumer model that also charges retail prices because you have to have the same price equivalent across all of your channels. That's the one thing that we did. That was very disruptive. We just didn't charge for the retailer markup or for the celebrity marketing or for The middleman so it's the same product but if much less expensive and of course, it will depend on whether retail comes back. If you're a brand that's in retailers and on retail websites, you're going to have to charge the same price for your product no matter where people pick it up. So that's sort of the differentiator between us and and other brands. I think a lot of people were in first hearing about beauty paise what we'd like to be able to go into a shop and try on a lipstick or try on and eyeshadow and I'm not sure how soon Nothing like that will come back because we're going to have to be really careful about trying on products that aren't you know, Freshly Wrapped.

1 (28m 21s):
Let's just say

2 (28m 22s):
question from Kelly Marie Williams. How do you stay motivated when things are not going as planned or when your personal life is not particularly motivating. She wants to bottle up your enthusiasm Marcia. That is what she writes. How do you do it? Because it is it is it work. Do you work hard to make

1 (28m 38s):
yourself? So have it right? So being positive? I think we're thinking okay if you're having a negative moment. Just think all this is temporary and the habit of remembering that negative moments are temporary. It's just something that you have to practice like Buddhism, right? You have to practice how you control your thoughts and over long periods of time. You just get better at it and you know, you know, there are hard times and you'll have those more difficult days, but usually the next day if you get a good sleep, you gonna feel great again, so just remembering everything is temporary and just you know being grateful for what we've got anybody watching. This has a computer Our phone to be able to connect with people through technology that isn't available to everybody and that's just that's also a real gift.

1 (29m 22s):
So I try to always remember what my gifts are even if I am having, you know struggles on one side that trying to remember how lucky I am all the time and I feel incredibly blessed and every time that I'm going through a struggle and certainly, you know with business. There are always these struggles you just remember that you're going to come out stronger on the other side. And anything that is hard is a learning experience if it wasn't already wouldn't need to learn it.

2 (29m 49s):
So in anything that's worth doing is hard. Yes, I agree. We have time for one more. I'm just going to ask you this question, which I've been asking everybody who comes on which is in five years from now. What do you want to take away from this time that you want to carry with you in the future and you want to kind of inform the way you think about how you run your businesses?

1 (30m 6s):
I think the most important part and the most important kind of Reckoning that I've had some this is just the understanding of how important is to connect with people to take that time to really listen that you're listening to understand not necessarily to respond to be able to have that real and authentic connection with customers because you're not rushing as much to find out what they really want and what's important to them because that's what's going to keep you on top of your game in the future and being able to have those real heartfelt true conversations with people like this is a Time that we're getting to do that you probably wouldn't normally have so we really have to embrace it take advantage of it spend that extra time that we've got.

1 (30m 55s):
I'm also on our families on our kids who we might not you know, I've not had to get on an airplane for nine weeks that is just absolutely amazing. And that's a gift to so, you know because of Technology I'm able to be you know with my kids and also able to be with my customers and That's a wonderful thing.

2 (31m 16s):
So I love it. It's so great to see you. Thank you so

1 (31m 20s):
much. Thank you for having me and good luck to everybody who's watching. We'll make it

2 (31m 25s):
that's an excerpt from my conversation with Marcia Kilgore the founder of flip-flop beauty pie Bliss and many others to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them at youtube.com slash NPR This Week. We've been going live every single day with leaders in the Fashion and Beauty World on Friday. I'll be hosting my last conversation of the week with James Reinhardt the founder of thread up. So bring your questions and join us live on Friday at noon Eastern nine Pacific on Twitter Youtube or Facebook. And if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilient series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org.

2 (32m 7s):
This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from John Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening and stay safe. Safe and we'll see you next week. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I got this from NPR.