2 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more.

1 (15s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, I just want to tell you about the how I built this book. It's coming out in just a few weeks. But if you preorder before September 30th, I will send you a signed book plate for free if you love this show. So if you love the stories you hear on it, if you're inspired by them, if you're looking to start a new business or just thinking about it. Well, you may want to check out the how I built this book. It's full of inspiration ideas stories and insights pre-order your copy of how I built this by visiting Gyros.com or how I built this.com for more details.

1 (56s):
Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other interesting people about how to think creatively during this really disruptive moment. And today we're going to hear from Samantha be the host and creator of full frontal with Samantha Bee Samantha's been quarantining at her home outside of New York with her kids and her husband Jason Jones who's also an executive producer on the show writing and producing a show remotely has A learning experience for Samantha and her staff but it's allowed them to rethink the production process Samantha spoke to me from her apartment in New York City where she returned just in time for our conversation.

1 (1m 39s):
I know you've been filming the show from upstate New York in your backyard. You are now in your apartment in Manhattan. Like I think I just got there

2 (1m 47s):
right? Well the tropical storm last week knocked out power to our house and we have do not have power yet. At the house, we don't have power and we don't have Internet and today we'll make it like officially I think we're passing the one week Mark since we've had power or Internet. So we came into the city where we also have questionable internet. So I hope that it works.

1 (2m 13s):
Is there any talk about if when the to show might go back to the

2 (2m 17s):
studio? We are constantly talking about it, but there doesn't seem to be any movement in that direction, which is Really fine for now. And it's fine for September is not as fine fur October November December January February. So, you know, it's our studio is a huge shared space. We've literally share our studio space with John Oliver's Show and I dr. Oz Show, so it's much more difficult. We don't control our own environment. So it's going to be very difficult for us to go back to the studio. So we're there's about 10 different. Scenarios that we're kind of juggling for how to move the show forward into inclement weather or freezing cold will see

1 (3m 3s):
you have a team a big team that produces the show think like 70 people. So first of all, how have you been managing that and how is your team been managing through this?

2 (3m 14s):
I think you know, everybody's been doing incredible work, you know in the most anxiety riddled of circumstances. Everybody has their own personal life that they're also bringing to the table. Every day which everybody's really frightened and people live with varying degrees of privacy and we have lots of young people on staff who have roommates and everybody's kind of clustered in the small apartment. So it's really difficult to not have a central place to go and make the show. We all can work very independently. We've proven that I think the social stress is pretty acute. It's not that you have to be together to do this show, but we prefer to be together and so that part Has actually been I think pretty stressful.

1 (3m 58s):
When was it clear that this thing was real and scary. And when did you decide to just go for it and just start filming from home? Like how did you guys come to that

2 (4m 7s):
decision? I think that really March 11th, March 12 was a really critical period where a lot of people all at the same time. We realized that something big was really happening. And that was the moment when we got kicked out of our studio. Basically we shot our last show I think March 11th at the building kind of closed around us because they had found a couple of covid cases in the building itself. And so they were evacuating the building as we were taping the show and that moment really we knew that we would not be in the studio the following week everything started to shut down around us. And so we really advise people were like grab your stuff grab what you need and go and we did the same Jason and I we packed a suitcase not really knowing that we would shoot the show.

2 (4m 56s):
Show in at our house, we didn't I didn't do a good job packing. I packs like five Blazers and a bunch of high-heeled shoes. Like I just Panic shop to my apartment. And as we were up there for a couple of days, we really had no plan except could we possibly shoot the show from up here? Like I don't know but then after a couple of days up there Jason and I decided to just start shooting stuff just because we wanted to Mark the moment where we were just living up there and what if I was like a Woods woman living In the shack behind are behind our Gardens and so we just started shooting stuff and it really turned out to be a proof of concept to the network that we could shoot in our backyard and then it would look good and then it could be broadcast quality even though it's shot on iPhone.

2 (5m 42s):
We very quickly made the decision to shoot outside so that we wouldn't need lights so that we could just have used the light of the sun because we thought OK we'll we'll just use this big Golden Ball that's in the sky. That'll light everything. That'll be cheap. And that's That's how it started and then it just grew and grew over the course of days to where it really seemed possible. So then we just tried to make a show and it

1 (6m 4s):
worked. I mean you've been like you've used your kids iPads as teleprompter

2 (6m 9s):
and that has not changed that has remained stable. I still use my daughter's iPad as there's a teleprompter. There's no teleprompter app that I use it works. Great. I clip it to a stand. I run it myself. It's a very DIY kind of experience, but you know Jason. I come from the world of sketch, which is totally DIY and we've always been that way as a couple making movies in our house and doing stuff like that. It's one of those full circle

1 (6m 35s):
moments. How's it been for you to you know, not performing in front of an audience. Like, you know, you make a joke and you wonder is anybody laughing or watching? Like, how do you like? How are you managing that are you

2 (6m 46s):
just I'm not, you know, I don't come from a stand-up background. It's natural for me to work the crowd in my way of doing life to tape. Bones, and I certainly learned how to do that working at The Daily Show for a really long time. So I'm really good at it. And I enjoy that I enjoy that back and forth with the audience. I really enjoy that kind of communion with them, but I don't need it. I think I don't need it. Like I think I have a good sense of what the rhythm of the show is without them and if it's not safe to have an audience and it's not it's just not prudent to do that. I love our audience. I want to put them at risk and I don't want to put our crew at risk, so we're not going to have an audience for a really long time. Really? Who knows if I recall correctly when I started this show I didn't really want to have a live audience.

2 (7m 33s):
I didn't think it was necessary for what I wanted to do in the end. I did decide to have a live studio audience and and it was really great and I got a lot out of it and I really enjoyed meeting people because I really really do enjoy that but I can easily go back to not having an audience because I do feel the audience somewhat it's fine to do the show in the forest. It's a little weird to do it just for my husband because he is he's wildly support. He's like my biggest fan, of course. We've been married for 20 years, but also he will tell me when I do something badly and he is not afraid he is not shy about telling me when I'm doing something wrong or I could do something better. I can improve so it's it's very much a back and forth between the two of us and our kids are there sometimes because they're holding equipment if they're willing to do it, which they are not often willing to do it because it's kind of it's really boring for them.

2 (8m 26s):
But it's really helpful when they help us. It's actually really great. So that part is taunting and then it's also daunting to do Zoom meetings. So we're having like these big meetings like staff wide meetings. But if you if you're looking at your own if you're looking at the other person in your computer, or you looking at yourself, you're not really relating to other people. So you're really only relating to people through this like dot in your computer because you're not really looking at anyone you're just talking to a DOT, which it's not ideal. It's not

1 (8m 55s):
ideal. I want to ask you about those meetings. Do you guys have a daily staff meeting like a daily Zoom meeting?

2 (9m 1s):
I don't have a daily staff meeting with everyone but there are daily meetings for sure across departments.

1 (9m 7s):
Yeah, I mean I and I struggle with this and I've asked people who come in a sure about this because it's it is in a sense a way to connect and it's a way for everybody to see each other and just to just to see cases. It's a little bit awkward when you hear your kind of staring into this Green Dot on your

2 (9m 24s):
computer. Yeah. It's not ideal. I don't like it. I don't think there's anyone at work who likes it. It does feel awkward like, you know, usually I'm talking and it feels like I'm monologuing. Do you know there's no back and forth. You're just not seeing the Nuance like you're not seeing the micro Expressions on people's faces and they're not really catching your body language and I start to ramble because I'm trying to fill space because no one's really like there's just no there's no give and take lots of people. A mute their microphones because they're like rattling bags or they have kids who are homeschooling and it's nice and it's respectful. But at some point I was like, please stop meeting.

2 (10m 5s):
I'd really rather hear the crunching bag or something then just like silence.

1 (10m 10s):
It's for anything about the approach that you've taken these past events. Like where are you couldn't focus on like perfect lighting or perfect set or you just have to do it. Is there anything about that approach that eventually you want to take that or that you will take back with you when you are. In a more controlled

2 (10m 26s):
environment, I think so there are ways that we have changed the process of Taping that makes sense for me to continue. Look normally we would if we were in the studio by way of example on a normal one say we would do a rehearsal a full rehearsal of the show around noon 12:30 something like that. And then we you do a long huddle like a three-hour huddle where we rewrite the show because often a joke is so funny and it looks great on the page. But when you say it out loud in a big Huge Studio space it just doesn't land the way you want it to or I don't nail it or something. We're like, let's tweak that so we make all of these little tweaks and adjustments. And then of course the audience comes in and then a performance is very much for the audience.

2 (11m 9s):
Like it's there's a community experience of it and your kind of Surfing the wave of their enthusiasm. It's a totally different type of experience. So adjusting the show, we now tape with the tape on Tuesday because the edit process takes an immense amount of taxes. Totally different experience of editing so we have to do it a day before so we don't have an opportunity to add jokes Wednesday morning or Wednesday at 4 o'clock. If something happens in the news, we can't quite pivot that quickly but I don't I don't regret that. I can see now that maybe we don't need to do it that way maybe giving ourselves a day in between is perfectly fine way. What I'm saying is I've missed the community of it and I missed the rewrite because it's really rollicking and fun and Graphics is changing things.

2 (11m 55s):
Things and we're making all these changes. I miss that enthusiasm and that moment we're all in the grind together. I miss being together with people but I don't really miss the actual technical aspect of it. And so I think we'll bring that back when we're in a more normal situation, but who knows really when that will be

1 (12m 12s):
when we come back in just a moment Samantha answers some audience questions and talks about the future of Television production. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from HubSpot complex enterprise software shouldn't get in the way of doing good work. However spots marketing Hub Enterprise makes it incredibly easy to do powerful things launch campaigns quickly from a user-friendly interface improve performance using Ai and attribute Revenue to every marketing activity with HubSpot.

1 (12m 53s):
You can spend more time. Time delighting your customers and less time managing software discover all the new features in marketing Hub Enterprise at HubSpot.com. Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition. So comedians Samantha bees been filming her show from her home and providing some comic relief during these pretty challenging times because so much of your comedy focus is obviously on news and current events and politics and it is this a dark time. I mean, it's been like the king of bad years in recent years. Obviously, I mean you you provide us with comic relief like we come to you to laugh like that is what you do for us.

1 (13m 39s):
About you, how do you like? I mean do you have days where you just want to like hide under the covers and like

2 (13m 46s):
cry course of course. Oh, yes. I'm still if I do. This is my job. I do a comedy show. I love doing it in some ways. Like if I wasn't making this show for broadcast, I'd probably be trying to make this show just for myself and my family so it's a very natural like organic extension of who I am, but I'm it's a roller coaster ride. We don't ultimately were Very lucky, we're healthy. We're in a house were safe. So we're counting our blessings for one thing. We're working which is an additional blessing. So I'm like really trying to be mindful of all the things that we do have to be thankful for and of course, we're going through an absolute rollercoaster of emotion because we're also only human too and we watch the news we don't watch the news right now because we don't have any power, but I think maybe that's a blessing to hey, you just launched a pilot.

1 (14m 39s):
Guest what does that allow you to do that? You can't do on television.

2 (14m 43s):
Well, it's a long it's such a long conversation, which is really beneficial. I do interview. A lot of people on the show, which I love I actually just love interviewing people. I truly do but the show is 21 Men. I mean the show itself the entirety of the show's 21 minutes. So when I interview someone we talked for half an hour and then we end up using five minutes of that whole conversation. So it's also just it's something I truly love to do. I'll be interviewing people for my whole life when I retire when I'm an elderly person in a home. I'll still be interviewing people. Like I just I'm so curious about bomb. So it's really fun for me. I don't find it to be an onerous task to like sit down with a list of people who I really dig and talk to them for 45 minutes.

2 (15m 31s):
It's great

1 (15m 31s):
on a recent episode. You had the New Yorker journalist Jelani Cobb on and you asked him if you go back in time and delete certain social Media platforms which ones would they be? You are very familiar with the pitfalls and Perils of social media. Like what would you if you go back in time and change it? What would you do

2 (15m 50s):
boy? I wouldn't I would just delete Facebook. I mean I would never was a Facebook person but it's just done so much damage not just in our own country, but across the world. I mean, it's there are countries across the world in which Facebook is like considered to be the government practically. It's the only resource people have to communicate. A gate and to understand the world that they're living in and I think that's very dangerous. You know, they just built a piece of Machinery that they really did not understand its capabilities. I've never really understood why it came into people's lives and they were so willing to give it all of their personal information. I've just never understood the function of it in someone's life and I think it's done immense damage.

2 (16m 34s):
So I would that's one that I would really take a look at

1 (16m 38s):
this. I'm going to combine two questions from An engram and Kim cope you've got kids at home. How are you and Jason doing with school starting again? And how are you like, you know working from home during covid and also living from home.

2 (16m 51s):
I mean it is a struggle. I think across the board. I'm so worried about the fall. Honestly, we have kids in the New York City public school system. They're going back to school in September. Of course, we're very stressed and worried We Trust our school administrators to have game doubt every scenario. And so I'm going to go with whatever their plans end up being I still think it's a moving Target a little bit because it's only August 11. So I'm not entirely sure that the final decision has been made by any of the school administrators for what's happening in September. I'm going to trust our individual principals. I've got a lot of masks on order will be masked will respect those systems, but I do expect that our children will be going back for some type of Blended learning.

2 (17m 36s):
It's immensely worrying and it's So difficult for parents and they really really I really feel that too

1 (17m 45s):
personally. Yeah, Sam Before I Let You Go, I mean when you think about how the industry will change, you know, we had we've had some people from the industry on producers and we had Jeremy Zimmer that have UTA on a couple weeks ago television really is not being made in general is a little bit but in general it's not being made. There's going to be a shortage of new television in like a few months, but when you think about how this pandemic is already changing the industry Tree and even changing what you do are there things about those changes that you actually think have been good in some ways.

2 (18m 18s):
I think it's been revelatory to realize that we actually could change some pretty fundamental systems within our process. Like we just we just built the show a certain way and actually pivoting and doing the show a different way has been fine and you feel sometimes when you have a system in place that really works for you that you can't ever make a big change. Well, in this case we were absolutely forced to make a big change and some of the ways that it changed were very good and I actually do think if I may say so myself that the backdrop of the forest is very pretty. It is free nice to look at and it's seasonal. So when the leaves start to change it'll be very well be very attractive as for like the industry as a whole.

2 (18m 60s):
I'm not sure what is good about the changes that will be moving forward. You know, I think there's a way to shoot things. Things safely. I think there's a way for us to return to sort of like quote unquote normal like regular looking television and that really probably requires quarantining entire Productions together that can be done networks have been through this is unprecedented for them. They've lost so much ad Revenue. They're probably going to try and start making shows more cheaply and that doesn't necessarily mean that they will be great be a lot of reality in our lives for the next little while. We're certainly All looking back at regular television now and going look at all those people in a restaurant like we you know, we're watching Tom Cruise movies and were like look at that cafe just all breathing on each other.

2 (19m 52s):
So I do think it'll change the tone of programming but I don't know what I can say moving forward will be great. I haven't figured that out yet. I'll let you know what the brighter side is the next time I am

1 (20m 4s):
on it, perfect. But at the end of the day you have become a better camera operator and Sound

2 (20m 9s):
recorder we have become better at that. We've become very good at lighting like we've become very good at harnessing the power of the sun to just get make it Glow just so which is always beneficial. It's just very good

1 (20m 24s):
Samantha Bee co-creator of full frontal with Saint Anthony. Thank you so

2 (20m 28s):
much. This is such a pleasure. It's great talking to you.

1 (20m 31s):
That's an excerpt from my conversation with Samantha be the host and co-creator of full frontal with Samantha Bee to see our full interview. You can go to Facebook. Look.com how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR. If you want to find out more about the how I built this resilient series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Candice limb with help from will Mitchell Tyra Lockhart Matt Adams, Gianna, Kappa, Dona, Dona, Isabella. Julia car need evil Grant and Jeff Rogers. Thanks for listening. Stay safe, and I'll see you back here in a few days. A guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.