0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor GoDaddy, making a different future starts with you. Go, daddy helps you create, sell, and get found online so you can create change or build an empire stark different@godaddy.com. Hey, it's guy here calling on all of you to join us. This may, for the, how I built this summit at home from May 24th to the 27th, we'll be bringing you four days of incredible interviews with people like Bernay brown, Gary V Troy Carter, and many more and opportunities to connect with other entrepreneurs in our global community. Thank you to GoDaddy the presenting sponsor of this year's summit and to our supporting sponsors, Dell technologies and bulldog online yoga for more information, head to summit.npr.org.

0 (54s):
Hey everyone. And welcome to how I built this resilience edition from NPR I'm guy Roz each week on Thursday, we invite entrepreneurs and other business leaders to come onto the show live to talk about how they've been building resilience into their businesses over this past year. And today, my conversation with Byard, Winthrop, CEO and founder of the apparel company, American giant, they sell American made casual clothing like hoodies t-shirts and jeans. I first interviewed Byard in 2012 for a radio story about American manufacturing. He founded the company earlier that year with the idea of making a high quality American made product, something almost unheard of in a market dominated by fast fashion, like forever 21 and H and M.

0 (1m 39s):
Now almost 10 years later, Byard has had to figure out how to keep the business afloat during the pandemic, the shutdowns last year, initially put their production on hold and closed their storefronts.

1 (1m 52s):
It's a ten-year old business that really was founded on a very simple idea that we could still make great things in America, great clothing in America. And we started the business 10 years ago with the sweatshirt you're wearing. Actually it was a single product that we kind of poured our life and soul into. And the business is bigger than that now in a wider product line, but it basically was built on an idea that everyone at the time was saying, it wasn't possible that you could build a good, healthy, vibrant clothing business entirely in the United States and the customers would respond to it. And so it started out online, online only, and now we've got some retail stores, but, but it's a pretty basic idea that I think the customer customers out there had been looking for and wanting for a long time.

1 (2m 34s):
And no one had really, I think, taken the leap to try it

0 (2m 37s):
Fire. We shouldn't, we should mention that you are based in San Francisco and I'm sure people say to you, wait, you do make sweatshirts and t-shirts and apparel in San Francisco, right? You're not, but you were, you do have a background in tech, you were in the tech world for some time. How did you get the idea to leave that behind and start an apparel company in San Francisco? How did that, how did that happen?

1 (2m 58s):
I started off career in finance actually, and left that quite quickly, realizing that I wasn't any good at it. And I had no interest in it really. And then sort of luckily found myself in a company that was making a physical product as a snowshoe of all things. And once you get your, at least in my case, once you get your arms around a physical product and the making of something above kind of never leaves you. And I did for a brief period, run a tech company and internet company, early internet company. But that if more than anything else that reinforced my total desire to be in the making of physical products. And so that, that part of the transition was quite easy. The contrast of being in San Francisco was sort of this tech Capitol with a real manufacturing business.

1 (3m 40s):
That's an interesting one. We are kind of one half a tech business because we we've got a big e-commerce business. A lot of our business has to do with taking advantage of the innovations and manufacturing innovations, but also technology and technological and e-commerce innovations. And then the other half of it is manufacturing. And a lot of that is in places like north and South Carolina, where the bulk of our production is done and we actually own some factories down there. It's one part tech, one part, part old world manufacturing. So it's been a pretty interesting 10 year journey of balancing those two things.

0 (4m 11s):
One of the things that attracted me to your story and your clothing is that it's American made. And I say that, and I want to be clear about that. Cause I don't mean this in a jingoistic way. Like go America, American made is the best. That's not what I mean at all. I, I, there are excellent products that are made in China, in Mexico. They're excellent products made in Europe, made around the world. And I love particularly products that are made for domestic markets are often even better. The reason why I love the idea of, of clothing made in America is because it's not traveling our ship halfway around the world and it has a smaller carbon footprint. And I think that's also a big reason behind your thinking. It's not about sort of America first idea, right?

0 (4m 52s):
Like we should be clear about that. It's just about using local materials to make your product

1 (4m 56s):
That's that's right. And, and maybe even a little understated. I think one part of it is that the act of making clothing, as for was for many years, it's quite a simple thing actually, and was, was typically quite localized over the last 20 or 30 years as the globalized economy has become globalized and very complicated. What is happening in the apparel industry now, which has been this sort of relentless March towards cheaper and cheaper and cheaper production has also made a globalized manufacturing ecosystem, wildly complicated. That actually kind of came into focus during the pandemic, I think, but proximity and localness not only drives better environmental practices because you're close and you're not moving things as you say, across oceans and, and making things oftentimes in countries that maybe don't have the best environmental standards, but just the, the, the, the act of being close to the people and the places that make the things that you make in my judgment makes for a better business.

1 (5m 52s):
I oftentimes say that if you asked me how knowing a cotton farmer in North Carolina makes a better sweatshirt, I can't draw a direct line from a to B to tell you how other than to just tell you that it does and that our level of connection to the people and the places that make our products make us better stewards of the products. We be better caretakers of our customers and our producers. You're absolutely right. That there's phenomenal stuff being made overseas in many cases better than what the American capability still has, but there are benefits by staying local as well, that are rooted in quality and responsibility, I think.

0 (6m 27s):
Yeah. And I think probably a case in point is the iPhone, which is of course made in China. And it's a phenomenal product fired. Why is it so hard? And maybe it's not, but why are so few clothing brands manufactured in the U S is it that hard to make clothing in the U S is it, is it the cost what's w why

1 (6m 48s):
It's more expensive? So you've got labor rates in America, and that really boils down to the cost of labor. I think more than anything else, there are other factors, but that's the big one. And so I think it's more expensive for many, many years. The dominant paradigm in apparel particularly was to drive cheap and to drive the means of the cost production down. And, and so during that time, there has been, I think, a progressive decaying of the manufacturing base domestically, but there are real strengths in bright spots as well. So at first it was motivated by, by cheaper means of production that drove, I think, diminishing investment in domestic manufacturing. So it's quite striking now that when you go into, into facilities overseas, you oftentimes will see more modern, more updated manufacturing capabilities, new secure, domestically.

1 (7m 33s):
On the other hand, I'm part of this journey for us too, has been, as we have stood up a supply chain now across t-shirts and sweatshirts and jeans and pants and jackets, you do find these incredible pockets of capability that have driven our business forward. It's a mixed answer. I think that the, the, maybe the overly simplistic thing has been, that brands have been incented by shareholders to chase cheap production and better margins as much as possible. And, and so, and they've been in some ways, incented by our trade structures and our, in our economic policies to send them to do that. So it's been, that's a factor too, obviously,

0 (8m 8s):
And by consumer behavior, right? Because we're so used to just going, buying something cheap, wearing it for a short period time and throwing it away, I should be all, should be clear about something. Your sweatshirts are not inexpensive. They are more expensive than people might imagine, but they last, I mean, this is the second one I've had the first one. I think I, I wore out after seven years it's we got frayed and Emmy was amazing, but seven years with one sweatshirt. So they cost more, but you get what you pay for.

1 (8m 38s):
Thank you for saying that. That's nice to hear it. It's certainly true that that 40 years ago, just as a, as a generalized comment in America, we, we bought fewer things and we paid a bit more for them and in today's dollars. And there has been this shift towards almost disposable clothing that I think has got bad implications for us as consumers and bad implications for the environment and a bunch of other, but, and you're right. Consumers have a role to play. I will say though, that I think it is a big ask to ask consumers to recognize why it may make sense to pay $116 for a sweatshirt or $88 for a sweatshirt versus $29 for a sweatshirt. I think we have an obligation as, as business leaders, as policymakers, as the media to help understand what the costs of cheap are, because it isn't quite as simple as to say, oh, sweatshirts made for $29.

1 (9m 21s):
You actually pay for that in ways. Maybe they're harder to see and lost manufacturing capability in the U S and maybe environmental impact and other things. And so it is true that consumers, I think quite logically will go for, but for cheaper, most often than not. And I think we have a responsibility to it, to, to communicate why there are other alternatives in the market and in terms of quality and durability and, and maybe more, more responsible business practices, but that's our job, right? And I think the consumer's job is to judge us on the job that we're doing and to see whether we're putting a good enough product into the market to make them happy that they bought

0 (9m 53s):
It amazing because, and you know, this, and a lot of people listening and watching will know this. There was a time where, you know, shoes were made in new England. There, there are all these shuttered shoe factories, all over New Hampshire and Massachusetts. And in Vermont, there was a time when textiles, you know, all textiles were really made in North Carolina still has a robust textile industry, right? Cotton is still grown in parts of the United States. It's all just more expensive is your entire supply chain American from, from the zippers to the stitches, to the cotton, to the dyes, to, you know, the, these little rivets at the end is, is it all American made?

1 (10m 35s):
Everything is with a couple of exceptions. So Merino wool, for example, which is a type of wool to use, there's not a great supply of needle wool, but our basic guiding philosophy is we will run through walls to keep things domestic. If it's still possible to do it here, we will. There, there was a, you may have heard about our effort to do a, an American yarn dyed flannel a couple of years ago, that capability has essentially left the United States. And we spent a year and a half of our working life to try to, we stand up that supply chain successfully, ultimately, but it was hard. And I think that generally is our posture that we would kind of reject the notion that, that, that we can't do things here anymore.

1 (11m 15s):
There's some exceptions to that very, very high end technical fabrics that take you to the top of mountains. Those textiles by and large have left. Like I said, when, you know, wool, but other than that, we do basically everything domestic from the cotton up, that's just a good guiding principle that keeps us committed to what we're trying to do here. And it's not, we're not total purist about it, but we're 99% pure about it. I would say,

0 (11m 40s):
What do you think would make it easier or more attractive for manufacturers to produce their clothing in the United States? Obviously labor costs are always going to be high and they should be high, I guess, ideally union as well. So some employees are treated fairly, but what do you think are ways that could attract other manufacturers to, to either return their manufacturing to the U S or keep their manufacturing in the U S are there simple things that can be done

1 (12m 7s):
If they're simple, but that's a, that's a very important question. I would maybe frame it up this way. I think in my judgment labor rates should be high. You should be rewarded for working and working well and unskilled and skilled jobs in this country. That's my opinion. And, but I also think that it is an inconsistent policy from DC to say, we're going to burden our domestic capability with high labor costs, let's say, or higher environmental standards. And at the same time, be incenting our big corporations to advantage themselves by chasing the cheapest labor or the poorest environmental standards. So I think those two things are inconsistent and the answer lives in there somewhat. I think to the extent that we can begin to even out the playing field between what we are allowing to happen from manufacturing standpoint internationally and what we are holding our domestic producers too.

1 (12m 55s):
That's a big step to begin, to let, to level that up a bit more. I've got a great partner of ours who produces our yarns and, and the CEO of that company always says to me, define free trade first. And then I'll tell you if I'm afforded or not. And what he means by that is if I'm competing on a level playing field with my international competitors, I'm all in, I'll go toe to toe. But if it's an even playing field, then that's, you're unfairly burdening me in the market. So one piece of that I think is policy out of DC. Another piece of that is, is retailers. I'm really encouraged by a Walmart's $350 billion made in America initiative. Because I think as retailers begin to acknowledge and lean in and say, we are going to be a part of the solution here, and we're going to demand that our suppliers sourced domestically, what that does incredibly importantly, is it gives in textiles.

1 (13m 42s):
For example, our partners, the ability to know that they're going to have a consistent bit of work for not measured in months, but in quarters or years. And that gives them the confidence to have the capital investments to invest in innovation and technology and automation, those things that are going to help them stay competitive. I think brands have a responsibility to lead. I think that brands like American giant and others in textiles should begin to be a part of the solution. There there's a lot of things in, in the short term that people could shift domestically things like socks, and t-shirts the U S is actually quite competitive in those categories. It would be great to see some of the bigger brands moving in that direction and then find that to your point. I think consumers and ideally we're doing a great job educating consumers about the trade offs and doing a good job, building a great product and great valuable product.

1 (14m 30s):
And they're responding by, by directing their dollars. But I think those first three are the ones that matter the most that the policy changes the retailers and the brands. I think those are the ones that really have to begin to turn the ship around and, and give us a good dimensional economy that has the making of things as a big part of what we do as a

0 (14m 46s):
Country. Why don't we come back in just a moment, more of my conversation with Bard Winthrop and how keeping American giants apparel American made has kept the company's growth a bit slower compared to their competitors and why Bayard thinks that's their advantage. Stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this resilience edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, right? Point right point helps companies innovate in a digital world. They're behind the success of entrepreneurs who build amazing businesses from designing and launching products and virtual stores to re-imagining experiences like the in vehicle experience of the 2022 Cadillac lyric, right?

0 (15m 35s):
Point's mission is to make things just work better. So if you're looking to build the next amazing experience, check out the team over@rightpoint.com slash NPR.

2 (15m 46s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor Ford, introducing the Mustang Mach II. Here's the global brand director of electric vehicles. Jason Castro, Yoda on the challenge of creating an all electric SUV that drives like a Mustang.

3 (16m 1s):
Well challenge of making an SUV go fast. Is there a higher center of gravity? The beauty of the battery electric vehicle platform is that all of the weight was down low on the floor because that's where the batteries housed. And that's where the electric motors are

2 (16m 13s):
To learn more about the new all electric pony in the Mustang, stable go to ford.com.

0 (16m 23s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience edition. And I'm talking with buyer Winthrop, CEO and founder of American giant. It's an American made casual clothing company based in San Francisco in the time since you launched American giant, there've been other, let's say AF leisure companies. I don't, I don't know if you would describe American China's as leisure, but it's in that category. Some very good brands, outdoor voices and vori. And, and I, you know, I have some of those products are very good products, but they are generally made overseas those companies, you know, valuations have skyrocketed and, and attracted a lot of investors. I have to imagine that your growth has been slower as a result of the decisions you have made to remain domestic.

1 (17m 9s):
It has. And, and, and a lot of that was intentional. You know, one of the first investors that we had was the guy that basically built Pepsi-Cola got in Don Kendall, and he, he grew up on a dairy farm and was, you know, he drank a blue can of Pepsi and in a bag of yellow lays potato chips every day of his life until he died at 99. Wow. And he was, yeah, and he was remarkable guy and he, he never got involved in the day-to-day stuff, but he got involved in the big picture stuff. And he would remind me what we were here to do. And basically in essence, that was to build a durable generational brand that produced great products and that lived by our values. And so I think one of the things that, and we were not without our mistakes here, but I think a lot of what happened in the early commerce days were brands raising tons of venture capital money, really chasing growth above all else.

1 (17m 56s):
That can be pretty attractive. It certainly was for us. We grew very, very fast for the first four years of the business, but he reminded me that when you grow that fast, the temptation to let go of values and quality is put to the test. And so he just gave me the courage and the, and the partnership to, to say, we're here for the long haul. And we are going to try to do things steadily and well, and over the long haul, be judged by, by our actions, our values and how the consumers respond to it. So you're right. And it's been, and the other piece of it, just quick bit of history about us and, and guy, I know that, you know, this piece of it, but early in our time, we had an article that was written about the sweatshirt that you're wearing in slate magazine that called it the greatest hoodie ever.

1 (18m 42s):
And that, that, I don't think it's an overstatement that without that article, I don't think we'd be here. I think that that changed the trajectory of the business. One of the things that it did is it put us into a back ordered status for almost four years and a half years. We were trying to catch up hard, hard to believe that, but there is a reality there about how you manage growth and both in terms of the planning for it. Do you get aggressive enough to meet the demand, but also how you scale your, your supply chain? And so there were some inherent limiters to our ability to scale our manufacturing at a pace that allowed us to maintain our integrity from a product standpoint. So, yeah,

0 (19m 21s):
I want to get to some questions that we have from our viewers, some really good questions. This one is from Tushar, decide to a loyal viewer to sharp. Thank you for being here to Shara said, ask some, one challenge I face is the minimum order that American manufacturers expect. So a two Shar asks, what is your suggestion to manage this risk in terms of cost versus inventory management, especially when startups are still trying to validate themselves in the market?

1 (19m 48s):
Well, that's a great question, too. Sure. I think just to put that into, in simple terms, oftentimes what you find is that domestic factories will ask for minimums a thousand units of something or 5,000 units of something, and that's expensive and risky when you're just getting started. I think to show that I think, I think that there's, it's a two part answer. I think one is don't take no for an answer for the first year that we tried to make our sweatshirt in the U S basically everybody we spoke to told us that couldn't be done. But if you, if you kick on the door long enough, our experience has been, you'll find a factory that says, we believe it. We like it. We'll give it a shot and we'll partner with you on it. And that in many ways has been the story of American giant is, is our supply chain partnering deeply with us as a brand and really forming those bonds.

1 (20m 32s):
So I think one part of this that is talk to a lot of factories and there are a lot of them and find one that's a good fit for you. The other piece is I think, convincing in partnership, what you are trying to do and bring them along as believers. We, in our particular of this was we have a very important vendor called Carolina cotton works. It's based out of Gaffney, South Carolina. It's a family business that's been around forever. The patriarch of that family was a guy named Paige Ashby. I had talked to everybody I could find, I finally found myself in a room with Paige. I told him the idea, I talked about that sweatshirt. And Paige finally said to hell with it, I'm going to figure this out with you. And he threw his hat in with me and without him, we could automate that sweatshirt, but those people are out there and just spend time on the road, get, get out of your office and get into the factories and talk to people.

1 (21m 18s):
And I think you'll be quite surprised at what you're able to do if you're tenacious about it.

0 (21m 22s):
I'm just curious, fired, I mean, from a financial personal financial risk perspective, I have to imagine that it was a few years before you were able to pay yourself a decent salary.

1 (21m 34s):
So the really quick story there guy, cause it's a little bit more hairy even than that is, is I had been running another manufacturing business prior to that. And I had just had my oldest daughter, Agnes, who was, I think, a week or two old, and I got fired from that job. And it was two weeks prior to Christmas. And that sharpens the mind quickly. You, you get pretty serious about things like healthcare, but I had gotten so committed about the idea of American giant, that I proceeded with a business and basically funded it through credit card debt for the first few months. And in that process, talked to Mr. Kendall, the Pepsi-Cola person I was mentioning earlier, and he wrote me my first check, which was a $25,000 check. It wasn't enough to pay me, but it was enough to begin to defray some of the costs.

1 (22m 17s):
And he gave me a few milestones to hit. And then I hit him. And foremost later he put in another 25 grand, I think. And so he actually stayed with me in kind of this drip, drip, drip investment that gave me just enough. In retrospect, he was incredibly smart about that, that he was tough on me. He gave me just enough to get the elements in place that he needed to feel confident enough to put a bit more money into the business. So it was, it was lean for a few years, but not so mean that I felt that I was, I was being totally irresponsible about it. And I think within eight months I paid myself a nominal salary and within a year and a half, I was paying enough the salary that I could justify it to my family.

0 (23m 1s):
Let's talk about the pandemic. I know that from what I've read and I understand the early months were quite challenging. I mean, I think you had to, there were, there were questions about supply chain and there were production halts. And you know, obviously the concern about the safety of people working in factories, and you even started to work out of your car in front of your house because you've got three kids at home. I imagine that's why you were working out of your car.

1 (23m 29s):
That's right. That's right. You probably had the same situation guy. I was, I did this ridiculous sort of baths inside for a while, where I was putting a sheet of plywood over, over my lap. And, you know, invariably every five minutes, my four year old rose would come running into the room and yell at me, me a book, or I want a sandwich or something. And so I eventually realized that if I could get the parking spot right in front of my house, we live in the Castro in San Francisco, right in front of my house. I could still tell it to my wifi. So that became my office. And it was great by the way, it worked very, very well. I could just hop outside where I needed to be on a call or needed to be focused, slid my driver's side seat back. And I was good to go. And that was, that was my office for still is actually, but that was my office for quite a long time.

1 (24m 12s):
I'm actually in our offices right now, but to speak about the pandemic just for a second, you know, we, I think like, like everybody, when March came now over a year ago and the shelter in place waters happened in the bay area, the bottom fell out of the business. I mean, it really was scary. And our business, I think we were down 40 or 50% year on year. And I, I, when I sleep at night, I, I keep a pad of paper next to my bed. If I, if I'm not sleeping, I just get my thoughts out. And I still have this piece of paper, but I think the first or the second night of the lockdown I wrote on that sheet of paper, I said, we're going to S business is going to survive this, and we're not laying anybody off. And those became the kind of two guiding principles for the business that informed every decision to be made after that.

1 (24m 56s):
And what that immediately looked like was a, we got into a very aggressive posture and cost cutting. And this is to get back to the proximity and the people of a domestic supply chain. We were fortunate enough to be able to call all of our suppliers, all of our meaningful suppliers and you know, we, and I have developed relationships with these people over the years. And whether that was Kevin McCarter or Clover knits, or, or Paige at Carolina cotton works, or, or Andy at Parkdale and say, look, we need help. And we've got to cancel these orders. And two, we, one guy, they all said, you tell us what you need. We'll figure it out. And so we were able to trim our supply back massively. We stopped our hiring, we canceled it, any software contract, we could, we took a, I took a salary cut and my leadership team took a salary cut.

1 (25m 41s):
And, but then little by little things began to recover. And by July we were growing again and thankfully, and we were able to kind of navigate it well, but, but to your point, also, I think one of the things that comes into focus pretty quickly as we're in the bay area, and we had the luck of working from home, I was able to work from home. I didn't, I didn't, I don't get paid by having my hands on product every day, but our soldiers and our operators in the Carolinas do, and they get paid only when they show up at the factory. And so that was a big undertaking to, to make sure that we were being safe and that we were getting in the right protocols. And to those facilities, we had a brief period of time there where we were asked by FEMA to help make some masks for the federal government.

1 (26m 24s):
And we had to convert our factories to do that. So it was a, it was a bouncy year. The dominant takeaway was that people across the organization stood up and became leaders and, and helped us navigate it. And it was an incredibly humbling experience for me to see how people stepped up in a difficult time and got the business through what was a, I think once in a generation kind of moment.

0 (26m 49s):
And did you end up coming out of 2020? I'm assuming you, you had expected a catastrophic year, but did you come out of 2020 actually, you know, with, with some revenue growth

1 (27m 1s):
We grew and that, and that was growing. Despite our retail stores essentially shutting down, we had retail, which we had four doors and last year, you know, produce, they became a cost centers that were not generating any revenue at all, but we did grow. And I think bunch of things contributed to that. I think to your point, people during the pandemic were particularly interested in the clothes that we make. They were buying sweatshirts and sweatpants and jeans and t-shirts and things that we happen to be in the right category at the right time categories. We didn't have that. We had four retail stores. We didn't have a ton of retail exposure. And I think the positioning of the brand of just having a high quality localized supply chain helped both from a customer interest standpoint and more ability to be reactive.

1 (27m 43s):
So it ended up once the dust settled after the first three or four months of the lockdown, it ended up being a good year for us. A lot of that, by the way, was we, you know, we learned so much about our business, about my management style, about all these things by being forcibly remote that helped get the business, I think even more efficient and better than it was going into the pandemic. So

0 (28m 3s):
How did the past year change and sharpen and presumably improve your management style?

1 (28m 9s):
I've been thinking about this a lot, and I think that I have given lip service to, for most of my career to empowering people to lead in my organization. And I think a lot of people do that, but don't actually do it. They talk about it, but don't actually doing it. And that was, that was the case. In my case, I, I continued to manage my team as opposed to leading them and empowering them. And I think that the, and I've been maybe talking about that for many years in my career. I think what the pandemic did is by the force of distance and working from home, it required that we give the control of all aspects of the business down to our senior people, to our brand new hires.

1 (28m 50s):
And I don't wanna overstate this, but almost without exception, everybody rose and stood up and did just incredible jobs about taking ownership and pride over what we do. And that was just a, it almost makes me emotional talking about it. It was just an incredible thing to be a part of, to see people throughout the organization, step in and, and work hard and get things done that needed to get done in ways that were beyond what I think I'd ever believed was possible. So that has transformed the business in a really basic way. My management style. Now, I think it's totally changed. I think if you, if you asked my leadership team, they would say he is way less involved in the day-to-day, we're running the business now.

1 (29m 35s):
And he is really, he's thinking about high level direction, but he's let go a lot of the day to day in a way that maybe I had an it a tendency to metal and manage and get my fingers into the details. So I'm very grateful for that. It's been unexpected, but a totally positive change for me personally, and for the business, I think,

0 (29m 55s):
Yeah. I read an article in Inc magazine. That was a profile of you a few years ago. And I was surprised because your entire day was meetings and it seemed like you were really in the granular, you were into the granular side of things. It was like meetings about photography of catalogs and meet meetings about specific different kinds of yarns and design. And, and, and that was just a day in your life. And it seemed to me like that was quite a lot for the CEO of a company to be involved in every single step it's, it's something you'd want to do. It's your baby, it's your company, your business. And I understand that too, cause I have those tendencies too, as a leader, but it seemed like a lot. And, and I, I wonder if that is what you will go back to in a post pandemic world.

1 (30m 38s):
Yeah. I'm just thinking of that now, as you're saying that guys go back and read that because that is really instructive actually. And I think, I think that point about it being my baby is, but that's sort of almost the narrative. I told myself all along, like, it's my baby, I'm the only, one's going to care that much. In, in, in reality throughout our organization, people who've been caring and, and managing better than I would. And so it's funny thinking back about that, cause you're right. That really what was right. I hope not. I really hope not. And I think it has been such a positive shift for us and I feel it just kind of intuitively I've got this great sense of almost a familial sense about our team and American giant. Now that everybody it's almost like you, you, you, you now I think that the people throughout the organization are doing a better job at what they do than I ever possibly could.

1 (31m 23s):
And so let's check back in a year, but I hope I don't. I hope I don't go back to my old ways because they were not as effective. So I hope it's a permanent change.

0 (31m 31s):
That's an excerpt from my live conversation with Byard, Winthrop, CEO, and founder of American giant and American made apparel company. If you want to see the full interview or any of our past live interviews, you can find them on the, how I built this Facebook page or at youtube.com/npr. If you want to find out more about the, how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events, you can go to NPR presents.org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with help from Paris safari, JC Howard, Bruce Grant. Elmanian Giana Kappa Dona, John Isabella, Julia Carney Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Janet.

0 (32m 11s):
Ooh, John Lee, thanks for listening. Stay safe. And I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this resilience edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor GoDaddy, making a different future starts with you. Go, daddy helps you create, sell and get found online so you can create change or build an empire, start different@godaddy.com.