2 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show the how I built this book is now a New York Times and Wall Street Journal bestseller. So thank you to all of you who ordered it and for your support of this show. If you haven't picked it up and you want to learn the secrets of how to develop an entrepreneurial mindset how I built this the book is for you. It's now available wherever books are sold and in most countries around the world or by visiting how I built this.com or Or guy Roz.com and thanks. Hey everyone, and welcome to how I built this resilience Edition on these episodes were talking with entrepreneurs and other Business Leaders to find out how they are thinking and working creatively through the global economic crisis and the pandemic and today we're going to hear from Sonia Gil.

2 (55s):
The founder of flu ends her company offers a range of programs to help English speakers. Learn a new language starting with online video programs and eventually expanding into language immersion programs. Sonia let's start with the founding of Luann's I guess you found this like more than a decade ago and originally the idea was this was going to be an online only platform. Is that right?

1 (1m 19s):
That's right. So we launched our first product fluence Mandarin in January of 2007 kind of later. We can if we can teach Mandarin we can teach anything. Yeah. This was a while ago. This is free apps free anything and yeah. The idea was to have a self learn digital program that was specifically made for English speakers. And that's that's the key component there. And that's really what differentiates us from from everybody else. We deconstruct the language and put it back together from the point of view of somebody who's an English speaker was learning that language. So if you're going to learn Spanish and you come from English, the obstacles are going to face are going to be very Then somebody who comes from Italian, they're going to learn it quicker.

1 (2m 12s):
No doubt. You're going to have a harder time and it seems logical and you think that everything that's out there obviously takes that into account but that's not the case actually most of the programs and even books at University programs and everything else have one path of learning and that's what it is. And so that makes it harder for us. That means our Market is smaller that also means that every time Develop a language is incredibly difficult takes resources and time and whatnot. But it also ensures that you have better results and that you feel like it's made for you because it is made

2 (2m 50s):
for you. Yeah, and it was like an online program you'd go to website and then you would basically go through the different steps and taking the class.

1 (2m 58s):
Yeah, so the its online but there was a very big element which is the premise of everything that we do and it was how do we bring the magic that an Seeing teacher has some sure you've had an experience with a great teacher that you remember. I know I have it. Like how do we bring that to the digital space in a self learning program? And every one of our programs has a very strong video component. There's one person that teaches you throughout. I'm actually the video coach for a lot of the languages and so every lesson starts with an introduction in English explaining like, okay. Today we're going to do this we're going to face these obstacles were going to do it together and there's a big tutorial where we come.

1 (3m 38s):
Are English to whatever language you're learning? This is how we do it. There's a lot of graphics for its come in and out and then you go through a battery of workouts that are designed specifically so that you leverage what you learn and you go forward. There's always a conclusion on video. That's where we bring the cultural aspects of the language. We always talk about either a particular painting or an artist or a movie or book or a recipe like something that ties in the language with the culture and And that was how it all

2 (4m 9s):
started. So a couple years ago, you decided to kind of shift a little bit into in-person immersion courses courses in Oaxaca and in Mexico City and in Barcelona for people to go for it like a week at a time to just really immerse themselves in language tell me about that decision to kind of shift some of your focus in that direction.

1 (4m 29s):
It was actually an idea that had been floating around for a while for us. You know, we wanted to do something in person. That was there wasn't anything out. There that met our needs that involves not only just great teaching and a great methodology but also a beautiful place go to great restaurants like not have to think about it, right? There's a lot of immersion programs out there, you know, you can go to Costa Rica for a week and it's super inexpensive and you live with a family and it's cumbersome and you're kind of in a classroom with a lot of people a lot of young people. So this was thought for like adults. I want to go somewhere Where I'm comfortable I want to go to Great museums and here talks about history and culture and I just want to have like a whole experience about the language and the culture and the place that I'm visiting and there was really nothing out there.

1 (5m 22s):
So finally we decided to go for it and build it and started and a big part of that decision and why we haven't done it before is because again, the learning part of it is a big component and that meant that I had to sit down and write the program like Different how you learn through a screen and the programs that we've written Were Meant and written the thought of for somebody who is at home alone learning the computer when you are in an immersion programs, you spent four hours a day sometimes five hours a day with an instructor one on one. That's a whole different notion of different experience. So it was it was kind of like I had to reckon with the fact that I had to sit down and not sleep and drink lots of coffee for a long time.

2 (6m 6s):
So talk to me a little bit about what happened. And this year because obviously immersion programs you got people going to cities around the world and also had covid hits and and you

1 (6m 17s):
had to shut it down exactly. Yeah, and we went to zero. Wow starting this part of the business was like starting a brand new company all over again. It was like going back to the roots, you know, like what strapping it. How do we make it happen? How do we build it? Yeah, and that all happened in 2017 and 2018. We started like with our first groups in Mexico City. Grew hundred percent plus 2019 2020 it was going to be a big expansion here this year is when we were opening in Barcelona and Oaxaca well, and we had already grown a hundred percent only selling out till June like mid-year, right? So we was like our expansion here well, and we were meant to be starting our very first group and Barcelona on March 8 and the entire team was supposed to be moving to Barcelona on February 25.

1 (7m 13s):
So if you remember on Saturday, we weren't sure what was happening. Right? Right and Barcelona closed up, March 14. We had to make really hard decisions and at the time our team thought we were being a little bit like we were exaggerating our guests. We had to pull out early and we did we did in late February. We kind of just made the call and just wrote to everybody like hi. We're not doing this for phosphonium. We're figuring it out. One of our guests actually received the email for the postponement while she was on the plane well to go to Barcelona. She was going early like people were not happy. It was complicated.

1 (7m 52s):
It turned out later that we made the right decision and we were like the coronavirus Whispers but it was tough. I mean we had 50 people going to Barcelona opening up a whole city. We had programmed laid out for the whole year. We were opening up in Oaxaca and April we had relationships with vendors with hotels we had commitments that we had already paid for local teams. I mean Marsh was rough.

2 (8m 20s):
When we come back in just a moment more of my conversation with Sonia Gil and how our company had to rethink in person immersion in a world with no travel stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor HubSpot Legacy CRM platforms have made you compromise for far too long with HubSpot CRM platform. You don't have to choose between Enterprise tools that are powerful or easy to use it gives you both. So your Marketing sales and service teams can align with he's accelerate sales and anticipate every customer need finally.

2 (9m 7s):
There's a CRM platform that helps you run. Better so you can grow better without complexity ever getting in the way. Learn more at HubSpot.com. And one more thing the New York Times best-selling book how I built. This is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with tons of stories. You haven't heard about how some of the greatest entrepreneurs ignores, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books.

2 (9m 53s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this resilience Edition and I'm talking with Sonia Gil. She's the founder and CEO of flu ends. After travel restrictions shut down her companies in person immersion program in Mexico City Oaxaca and Barcelona flu ends had to return to its roots online education, but Sonia still wasn't sure if they'd make it. So any was there a moment where you were worried about? Whether the whole your whole business would would make it through this

1 (10m 21s):
year. Oh my God. Are you kidding? Yes, I'm still worried. We're relying on we're going but of course, yes absolutely. Step one was just go back to the Excel sheet and just dial down everything. Like what are we spending on that? We don't need to be spending on right now. How do we get to the bare minimum to keep going and you know, it was important to us to keep the entire team as much as possible. We had no idea was going to happen, but you know what? We do there's a lot of things that we have already paid for and what can we do here? Let's negotiate a lot of things. We lost a lot of things worried keep and then okay, we have all these people booked for the whole year. We need to contact them do the best we can in terms of, you know, returns are proponents.

1 (11m 4s):
Like we need to come up with a policy. That was like the first couple weeks. Just put it on the fire, right? Yeah at the same time being the psychologist and mentor and and shoulder for the team, you know, a lot of our members are quite Quite young and great amazing people that they they were like up in the air. Like what do we do now? We have yeah nothing. So a lot of it was also that like talking to every single individual person in the team. Hi, we're good. We got you covered till the end of the year. What's your situation? Can you make it if we bring it down like what's the deal? I want to know every single individual situation so that we could just feel at ease for at least the coming months so we could actually think and come together and figure Something out.

1 (11m 50s):
I was in Mexico City at the time. I have a home there. I'm base there. So I decided to kind of pack my bags and leave and we rented a home in Colorado far away from everything so I could just sit down and have time to focus and come up with something new. It was like kind of started a new company in 2017 what that takes and really here we are in March. We got to start a company all over again, but we got 30 days. What do we do? What's next

2 (12m 24s):
wow, so you go to Colorado after I mean putting out this huge fire must have been so stressful and you go there with the idea of like we've got to come up with a plan to keep our business operating through this economic crisis. So what do you what do you come up

1 (12m 45s):
with? Yeah, it was clear that the way to do it was okay. We got to Pivot and go online. We have digital products and weave Her left that alone that exist in that goes on but very different than when we do the immersion program. And so I was like, what can we do? How do we pivot the face-to-face experiences where people definitely expect much more than just the language learning right? It's about a cultural experience. It's about feeling taken care of. How do we translate what we have there into this right as cream and thankfully throughout the years that we've done the in-person immersion. We had been doing some online coaching with people that had already been immersion to continue.

1 (13m 31s):
So we had already a little bit of knowledge in terms of the format. We already knew that 90 minutes is the perfect amount of time to do a chapter. So we knew that and then when you a little bit about what the exchange is, like online so step one was all right team. Let's put together this content from getting everybody together training and making sure that The Exchange through a screen was the correct one and making sure that the look of what you see is pleasing aesthetic. It looks like it's thought out there's some informality through these types of engagements through screens that sometimes bring the little bit less seriousness to the conversation and we want it to bring you the seriousness which is what we have in the in person experiences.

1 (14m 17s):
So everybody has a uniform there's a system where we know exactly where every student is. And what they're going through at the same time. We have a meeting every week with all of our team members. We discuss every single student. What are they missing? Right? What do we need to change anything? Do we need to adapt and thing so it turned out that this online version of the immersion has been incredibly effective in terms of the learning for our guests because we can be that much more precise and we can individualize it that much more. You had someone can on this. Yep - but I love him and he talked about how the best learning experiences are.

1 (15m 2s):
When you have a great teacher that identifies your gaps and then focuses on that and this online version of the immersion allows us much better to hone in on those gaps and fill them in

2 (15m 15s):
this sounds like a really cool thing that you guys are doing. How are you getting the word out about the offerings and what are ways that you're trying to essentially acquire new users or get new customers.

1 (15m 28s):
That's a tough one the being the language learning business for so long. I can tell you that the Affinity isn't always there meaning guy you happen to like Italian and that's the language that you'd like want to learn but that doesn't mean that your friend wants to learn that or is willing to put in the time to learn that it's really hard to hone in on the demographics. Thankfully the way we started with the online immersion. That we have what database we have all the people that have come to the immersions. We have all the people that had signed up to come in the future. And so we were able to offer this as a replacement in a way and that got us started. We do campaigns in Google ads I talk to anyone that is willing to talk to me just like when we started digital programs same thing with the online,

2 (16m 17s):
how how big is your team right now?

1 (16m 20s):
So we are about 20 20 structures and

2 (16m 23s):
growing you do Spanish Mandarin Italian. What else

1 (16m 28s):
German Spanish French and Portuguese ready immersions for now. We only do Spanish. We definitely want to add

2 (16m 37s):
this a question from Chelsea Ewing. Ciao Chelsea asks, do you have any plans to create a feature that enables similar students to interact with one another?

1 (16m 47s):
So a lot of our students that are in the immersions now crave that connection with other students, right? And right now what we're doing is we're doing Live Events every month. So history talks. I'm a free by the way everybody who's listening come to our living. They're amazing. We have history talks in Spanish and English so that you can practice but also actually get the information cooking classes, whatever all sorts of interests and people come together there to mix and match. But yeah, that's something that it's in the There's everything still works. And uh,

2 (17m 20s):
and so I mean, it seems like this kind of pivot that you've made with the immersion program. We do you think that is going to actually impact the way you teach immersion even after we get out of this pandemic.

1 (17m 31s):
Oh my God. Yes. The answer is a solid 100% Yes. First of all, the online. Immersion is here to stay. I've no doubt. It's something that also had been in their minds, but if there's one thing this pandemic has accelerated, Rated and it has opened the doors for is online education. I think people are definitely ready and willing and much more open to it. So yeah, this is here to stay. I think there will be a mix of both so I can see how a lot of people will do an online immersion first before doing an on-site one to do we get the most of the on-site one, but we'll see right we're figuring it out.

1 (18m 13s):
It's we're growing the team at the same time. There's a lot of them. Sandy it's definitely less

2 (18m 20s):
lucrative me. It sounds like you're doing exactly the right thing. I mean A Moment Like This forces could strengths and within those constraints you have to be nimble and you have to be careful with how you spend money and you have to be focused and you're doing all those things.

1 (18m 33s):
Yeah, we're there and we're good. We're solid we're alive. We actually see a horizon where we can grow we've a new part of the business has sprung up and that's exciting, but we're still on total bootstrap mode like do not spend anything that does not need to be spent on right now because You have to have room to maneuver. You have to be able to change if need

2 (18m 59s):
be that's an excerpt from my conversation with Sonia Gil founder and CEO of flu ends a language learning company to see our full interview. You can go to facebook.com slash how I built this and if you want to see all of our past live interviews, you can find them there or at youtube.com slash NPR if you want to find out more about the how I built this resilience series or other virtual NPR events. You can go to NPR presents dot-org. This episode was produced by Liz Metzger with help from JC Howard. Will Mitchell Bruce Grant Matt Adams L Manion Gianna cappadonna, John, Isabella, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers are in turn is Farah Safari.

2 (19m 42s):
Thanks for listening to stay safe and I'll see you in a few days. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this resilience Edition from NPR.